
 ## An Acad Bras Cienc  93(4): e20200233 DOI 10.1590/0001-3765202120200233
 Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências  | Annals of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences Printed ISSN 0001-3765 I Online ISSN 1678-2690 www.scielo.br/aabc  |  www.fb.com/aabcjournal
 ## ECOSYSTEMS
 ## Toxic effects of chlorpyrifos, cypermethrin and glyphosate on the non-target organism Selenastrum capricornutum (Chlorophyta)
 CAROLINA FERNÁNDEZ , VIVIANA ASSELBORN &amp; ELISA R. PARODI
 Abstract: The  toxic  effects  of  the  insecticides  chlorpyrifos  and  cypermethrin,  and the  herbicide  glyphosate  on  the  growth,  biovolume  and  ultrastructure  of  the  green microalgae Selenastrum capricornutum were evaluated. Concentrations between 9.37150 mg L -1 of chlorpyrifos, 3.12-100 mg L -1 of cypermethrin and 4.7-60 mg L -1 of glyphosate were assayed along with a control culture. The assayed concentrations were prepared using  commercial  formulations.  After  48  h  all  tested  concentrations  of  the  three pesticides reduced signifi  cantly the population growth. The 96 h effective concentration 50 (EC 50 )  was  14.45  mg  L -1 for  chlorpyrifos,  12.37  mg  L -1 for  cypermethrin  and 15.60 mg L -1 for  glyphosate. Cells  exposed  to  the  three  pesticides  showed  an  increase  in  the cellular size related to the increase in pesticide concentration and exposure time. The most significant damages observed on the ultrastructure of cells exposed to the three pesticides included thylakoids and mitochondria disruption, formation of electrodense bodies, accumulation of lipids and increase in the size and number of starch granules. The present study demonstrates that the effects of pesticides also extend to non-target organisms having signifi  cant ecological implications.
 Key words: pesticides, microalgae, toxicity, ultrastructure, population growth, biovolume.
 ## INTRODUCTION
 The development and application of pesticides to  control  an  extensive  variety  of  pests  was essential  for  the  worldwide  increase  in agricultural production during the second half of the 20th century. Nowadays, the worldwide consumption of pesticides is about two million tonnes per year . However, the use  of  pesticides  has  become  increasingly controversial, while their use has resulted in a range of benefi  ts, including increased food production  and  reduction  of  insect-borne disease, their side effects on human health and environment have become a major concern, including the impact on water quality .
 Pesticide include a large number of organic and inorganic compounds that are classified according to the target organism in herbicides, acaricides, nematicides, fungicides, insecticides, rodenticide, defoliants, plant growth regulators, etc.  . Pesticides vary widely in their chemical structure, mode of action and toxicity. Pesticides should be toxic only to the target organisms and should be biodegradable and eco-friendly to some extent . Unfortunately, most of the pesticides are non-selective, killing natural enemies and other organisms that are useful to the ecosystem. It has been estimated that only about 0.1% of the pesticides reach the target organisms and the remaining bulk
 contaminates  the  surrounding  environment .
 Pesticide  residues  are  frequently  found in surface water in agricultural areas, often in concentrations that exceeded human-health guidelines .  Such  pesticides  are  applied  to  croplands and  they  can  reach  surface  water  through surface runoff, drift, tile drains, unintentional spills from point sources (e.g. places sites of spraying equipment and farm yards) . Freshwater species can thus be exposed to pesticides concentrations which range from lethal to sublethal .
 Microalgae have been frequently used in risk assessments of pollutants since they are easy to cultivate, have high growth rate and are sensitive to a wide range of pollutants . In addition, considering they play a crucial nutritional role in most aquatic food webs, they need special attention among non-target organisms, since any effect on them may affect the higher trophic levels affecting the functioning of the whole ecosystem .
 Microalgae  have  proved  to  be  sensitive to  a  large  range  of  contaminants  including herbicides , insecticides , heavy  metals  ,  industrial effluents    and  pharmaceuticals  and  personal care products . Regarding to pesticides, most of the studies focus on the effects of different compounds on photosynthetic pigments, growth and protein content but studies on the effects of pesticides on the fine cell structure of microalgae are very scarce .
 The present work aimed at assessing the effect  of  three  widely  used  but  chemically different pesticides, the herbicide glyphosate and  the  insecticides  chlorpyrifos  and cypermethrin, on the growth and ultrastructure of  the  green  microalgae Selenastrum capricornutum.
 ## MATERIALS AND METHODS
 ## Species test and toxicity bioassays
 Toxicity  tests  were  performed  on  the freshwater unicellular green algae Selenastrum capricornutum Printz, a standard test organism . Cultures of S.  capricornutum were  obtained  from  Dr. Armando  Vieira's  culture  collection  at  the Universidad Federal de São Carlos (São Paulo) and were kept in Bold´s Basic Medium .
 Stock cultures were kept in liquid media during 7 days at a temperature of 24 ± 2ºC under continuous illumination (4800 lux) in order to obtain a culture in an early phase of exponential growth. To avoid the settling of algae the cultures were  re-suspended  for  a  few  minutes  three times a day on an orbital shaker .
 The assayed pesticides concentrations were prepared using the commercial formulations Dursban ® (chlorpyrifos 10.5% w/v), Galgotrin ® (cypermethrin  25%  w/v)  and  Round-up ® (glyphosate  48%  w/v).  The  commercial pesticides were diluted in sterile distilled water and added to sterile Bold´s Basic medium in order to obtain the desired concentrations of the active ingredient.
 Microalgae  were  exposed  to  half-serial dilutions  of  chlorpyrifos  and  cypermethrin
 in  ranges  from  9.37  -  150  mg  L -1 and  3.12-100 mg L -1 ,  respectively. In the case of glyphosate, microalgae were exposed to one third-dilution in a range of 4.7-60 mg L -1 . These concentrations were selected through a preliminary assay in which the microalgae were exposed to a wider range  of  pesticide  concentration.  A  toxicity tests with the reference substance potassium dichromate (K 2 Cr 2 O 7 ) using a one third-dilution in a range of 0.08 - 0.52 mg L -1 was performed to evaluate the physiological conditions of the organisms and hence the validity of the tests .
 An  initial  inoculum  of  5x10 4 cells  mL -1 S. capricornutum was  added  to  each  pesticide dilution. All assays, i.e., reference toxicant tests, controls and pesticide treatments, were carried out in triplicate without medium replacement and  under  the  same  conditions  of  light, temperature and agitation as the stock cultures.
 To evaluate the effects of pesticides on the population growth, the number of microalgae in  each  replicate  and  in  the  control  culture was estimated by direct counting in Neubauer chamber every 24 h during the entire assay (96 h). To evaluate the effects of pesticides on cell volume, thirty  cells  from  the  control  culture and from each replicate were measured every 24 h under a light microscope Olympus CX23 (Olympus Optical Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) and the biovolume was calculated according to Sun &amp; Liu . Simultaneously, the shape, color and presence of granules in the microalgae were observed.
 Exponential growth rate ( r ) was calculated through the following equation :
 
 where N 1 is the number of cells at the end of the assay, N 0 is the initial number of cells and t is the exposure time in hours.
 The algal growth inhibition rate with respect to  controls  was  calculated  according  to  the following equation :
 
 where T is  the  number  of  cells  in  each treatment and C is  the number of cells in the control culture.
 Effective  concentration  50  values  (EC 50 ); i.e.,  concentration of pesticide which produces adverse effects on 50% of the population, and confidence intervals (95%) for each pesticide at each exposure time were calculated by means of a Probit analysis  of the percent inhibition of algal growth rate (%I) using the Infostat software package .
 One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to evaluate whether there were significant differences  between  microalgae  population growth (cell concentration and r) of the different treatments, when statistical differences among values  were  detected,  Dunnett's  test  was applied. The non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test was used to assess differences in microalgal cell volume between treatments since data did not attend criteria for parametric methods .
 ## Electron microscopy techniques
 At the end of the bioassay (96 h) the control culture  and  cultures  exposed  to  different concentration of pesticides (37.5 and 150 mg L -1 of chlorpyrifos; 50 and 100 mg L -1 of cypermethrin; 60 mg L -1 of glyphosate) were centrifuged at 4000 rpm during 5 minutes.
 Cells were fixed at 4ºC in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and postfixed in 1% OsO 4 using filtered culture medium as fixative vehicle.  Fixed  cells  were
 subsequently dehydrated in an acetone series from  10%  to  absolute  acetone.  It  was  then embedded drop by drop in Spurr's low-viscosity resin  and fl  at-embedded between glass slides coated with dry Tefl  on . Sections were cut with a Diatome 2.1 mm diamond knife (Diatome Ltd., Bienne,  Switzerland),  mounted  on  Formvarcoated  grids  (Polysciences,  Inc.,  Warrington,
 PA) and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. They were examined under a Jeol 100 CXII electron microscope (Jeol Ltd., Akishima, Tokio, Japan) at CCT-Bahia Blanca.
 Figure 1. 96 h growth curve of Selenastrum capricornutum in treatments with different concentrations of (a) chlorpyrifos, (b) cypermethrin, and (c) glyphosate. In each fi  gure the table shows signifi  cant differences in cell number of treatments compared to the corresponding controls. One asterisk: p&lt;0.05, two asterisks: p&lt;0.01, ns: no signifi  cant differences.
 
 (mL-1)
 (cellsx103
 ## RESULTS
 ## Effects of pesticides on growth
 Growth  curves  of S.  capricornutum under different pesticides concentrations are shown in Figure 1, the results of the statistical analysis are listed in the table inside the figure. All assayed concentrations of different pesticides inhibited the growth of S. capricornutum to some extent.
 The  five  concentrations  of  chlorpyrifos assayed  significantly  inhibited  the  growth compared  to  the  control  culture  (p&lt;0.01) at  all  exposure  times  evaluated.  At  the beginning of the bioassay with cypermethrin (24  h),  only  treatments  with  25,  50  and  100 mg L -1 significantly inhibited the growth of S. capricornutum (p&lt;0.01), whereas after 48, 72 and 96 h of exposure all the concentrations assayed significantly  inhibited  the  growth  (p&lt;0.01). In the bioassay with glyphosate, after 24 h of exposure only treatments with 36 mg L -1 (p&lt;0.05) and 60 mg L -1 (p&lt;0.01) significantly inhibited the growth, whereas with longer exposure times all concentrations inhibited the growth.
 As  shown  in  table  I,  the  EC 50 for  the  %I decreased with the increase of exposure time for cypermethrin and glyphosate, indicating a higher toxicity as the exposure time increases. For chlorpyrifos, after 48 h of exposure the EC 50
 increased whereas with longer exposure times it decreased, and after 96 h of exposure the three pesticides showed similar EC 50 .
 Table II shows the growth rates (r) of algal cultures exposed to different concentrations of pesticides after 96 h. The growth rate decreased as the concentration of pesticides increased, and all  concentrations  assayed  of  the  three pesticides reduced significantly the growth rate compared to the corresponding control without pesticide.  In  treatments  with  100  mg  L -1 of cypermethrin the growth rate was zero because the cell concentration at the end of the bioassay was lower than the initial concentration.
 ## Effects of pesticides on cellular size and morphology
 S.  capricornutum cells  exposed  to  the  three pesticides evidenced an increase in the cellular size; such increase was related to the increase in pesticide concentration and exposure time (Fig. 2).
 At the end of the bioassay with the three pesticides  (96  h)  statistically  significant differences were found between treatments (p &lt;0.01). For chlorpyrifos, significant increases in size with respect to cells in the control were registered  in  treatments  with  18.75,  37.5,  75
 Table I. Effective concentrations (EC 50 , mg/L) and the respective 95% confidence limit (95% CI) for percent inhibition of algal growth rate (%I) of the three pesticides to Selenastrum capicornutum in 24, 48, 72 and 96 h.
 |      |        | Chlorpyrifos   | Cypermethrin   | Glyphosate     | |------|--------|----------------|----------------|----------------| | 24 h | EC 50  | 32.33          | 31.31          | 61.86          | | 24 h | 95% CI | 25.88 - 39.89  | 24.31 - 42.05  | 49.94 - 110.55 | | 48 h | EC 50  | 40.93          | 16.36          | 39.02          | | 48 h | 95% CI | 32.73 - 51.47  | 11.82 - 22.43  | 28.97 - 62.13  | | 72 h | EC 50  | 21.91          | 12.46          | 24.44          | | 72 h | 95% CI | 13.89 - 30.58  | 8.91 - 16.75   | 19.13 - 33.06  | | 96 h | EC 50  | 14.45          | 12.37          | 15.60          | | 96 h | 95% CI | 10.58 - 18.27  | 9.08 - 16.28   | 12.27 - 19.67  |
 and 150 mg L -1 (p&lt;0.05).  In  the  bioassay  with cypermethrin, significant increases in size were observed in treatments with 12.5, 15 and 50 mg L -1 .  For glyphosate, at the end of the bioassay cell exposed to 21.6, 36 and 60 mg L -1 showed a cell volume significantly higher than control cells (p&lt;0.05) (Fig. 2).
 The  highest  biovolume  increase  was registered for chlorpyrifos, since after 96 h of exposure at the highest concentration (150 mg L -1 ) an increase of &gt;250% was observed.
 With regards to morphology, at the end of the bioassay, normal cells were found only in cultures exposed to the lowest concentrations of  pesticides,  at  higher  concentrations (chlorpyrifos 75 and 150 mg L -1 ;  cypermethrin 100 mg L -1 ;  glyphosate 21.6, 36 and 60 mg L -1 ) different degree of anomalies were observed under optical microscope, including deformed and chlorotic cells with abundant cytoplasmic granules and destroyed chloroplasts.
 ## Effects of pesticides on the ultrastructure
 Control culture cells showed the characteristics that best typify Chlorococcales . The  central  nucleus  exhibited  condensed chromatin  next  to  the  nuclear  envelope;  it also exhibited a pronounced neckline where
 Table II. Specific growth rate (r) (h -1 ) of Selenastrum capicornutum cultures after 96 h of exposure to different concentrations of the three pesticides. One asterisk (p&lt;0.05) and two asterisks (p&lt;0.01) indicate significant differences compared to the corresponding control without pesticide.
 | Pesticide    | Concentration (mg L -1 )   | Growth rate (r)     | |--------------|----------------------------|---------------------| | Chlorpyrifos | control                    | 0.0418 a ± 0.0010 b | |              | 9.37                       | 0.0359 ± 0.0001**   | |              | 18.75                      | 0.0343 ± 0.0007**   | |              | 37.5                       | 0.0280 ± 0.0011**   | |              | 75                         | 0.0247 ± 0.0002**   | |              | 150                        | 0.0127 ± 0.0007**   | | Cypermethrin | control                    | 0.0365 ± 0.0010     | |              | 3.12                       | 0.0332 ± 0.0017*    | |              | 6.25                       | 0.0307 ± 0.0008**   | |              | 12.5                       | 0.0310 ± 0.0012**   | |              | 25                         | 0.0288 ± 0.0005**   | |              | 50                         | 0.0212 ± 0.0009**   | |              | 100                        | --                  | | Glyphosate   | control                    | 0.0420 ± 0.0003     | |              | 4.7                        | 0.0388 ± 0.0007**   | |              | 7.7                        | 0.0380 ± 0.0005**   | |              | 12.96                      | 0.0358 ± 0.0003**   | |              | 21.6                       | 0.0344 ± 0.0008**   | |              | 36                         | 0.0324 ± 0.0005**   | |              | 60                         | 0.0139 ± 0.0004**   |
 a Specific growth rate is the media of three replicates.
 b Standard deviation.
 -- no growth.
 the large dictyosome was located (Fig. 3a and b). The parietal chloroplast occupied most of the cell volume and showed one conspicuous spherical pyrenoid. Thylakoids were arranged in an almost parallel pattern and starch granules were located between them (Fig. 3a and b). The cytoplasm  was  homogeneous,  showing  fine and regular granulation due to the presence of ribosomes. The cell wall was characterized by the presence of three layers, the outermost of which was involved in forming crests (Fig. 3c).
 S. capricornutum cells exposed to the three pesticides showed changes in the cell structure; the level of disturbance on the ultrastructure depended on the pesticide type and increased as the pesticide concentration increases.
 In  cells  exposed  to  chlorpyrifos  several organelles  were  affected  and  some  cells showed evidences of plasmolysis (Fig. 4a-d). In the cytoplasm of cells exposed to 37.5 mg L -1 electrodense bodies, that may contain material originating from the insecticide, were observed
 Figure 2. Biovolume (µm 3 ) of Selenastrum capricornutum after 96 h of exposure to different concentrations of (a) chlorpyrifos, (b) cypermethrin, and (c) glyphosate, mean ± SD (standard deviation), n=30. *Statistically significant differences from the control treatment (p&lt;0.05; KruskalWallis test).
 
 (Fig. 4a), as well as an increase in the number and size of starch granules (Fig. 4a). In the chloroplast the continuous and orderly array of thylakoids was  distorted  and  they  became  compacted in some cells (Fig. 4a) and wavy in others (Fig. 4b). Cytoplasm showed higher granulation in exposed cells than control cells, along with a higher number of lipid globules. Lipid globules were also observed inside the chloroplast (Fig. 4a). The cell wall presented wavy appearance, with the inner layer more developed. The nuclear chromatin was dispersed (Fig. 4b). Autospores were observed both inside the mother cell and free and they presented disorganized cytoplasm and numerous electrodense bodies (Fig. 4b).
 Cells exposed to 150 mg L -1 of chlorpyrifos showed  more  severe  damage,  with  higher number  of  electrodense  bodies  and  the entire cellular content disorganized, including thylakoids disorganization and total destruction of  mitochondria  (Fig.  4c  and  d).  At  this concentration  of  chlorpyrifos  autospores were  formed  but  the  cell-separation  phase was apparently inhibited, since in all samples autospores were seen only inside the mother cell. Autospores showed alterations similar to the vegetative cells (Fig. 4d).
 At  50  mg  L -1 of  cypermethrin  thylakoids were totally disrupted and mitochondria were fragmented.  Numerous  lipid  globules  were observed in the cytoplasm of some cells and also between the thylakoids (Fig. 4e). Cells exposed to 100 mg L -1 were more severely affected, with bigger and more numerous lipid globules, that sometimes occupied the entire cell. An increase in the number of starch globules was observed in some cells (Fig. 4f). Mitochondria were still more fragmented and showed irregular crests. The three-layer structure of the cell wall could not be noticed clearly.
 In cells exposed to 60 mg L -1 of glyphosate the  chloroplast  and  mitochondria  were  the organelles  that  underwent  the  greatest changes,  with  compacted  thylakoids  and  a big development of the condriome. Abundant lipid globules and vacuoles were observed in
 Figure 3. Transmission electron image of control culture cells Selenastrum capricornutum. (a) cross section of a vegetative cell. Note the condensed chromatin next to the nuclear envelope and the parietal chloroplasts occupying about half of the cell volume (x17,300); (b) longitudinal section of a vegetative cell. Note the dictyosome located in a neckline of the nucleus (x23,500); (c) detail of the cell wall characterized by the presence of three layers (CI, CII and CIII) (x57,000).
 
 the cytoplasm and in some cases occupied the entire cell. The nuclear chromatin was dispersed. The cell wall was not affected and the threelayer structure was still evident (Fig. 4g). At this concentration of glyphosate the formation of autospores could not be evidenced.
 ## DISCUSSION
 Organophosphate pesticides (OPs) are among the most widely used pesticides available and they are generally regarded safe for use on crops due to their fast degradation rates . In this study, we evaluated the effects of two different OPs, one insecticide
 Figure 4. Transmission electron image of Selenastrum capricornutum cells exposed to different pesticides. a and b: cells exposed to 37.5 mg L -1 of chlorpyrifos; (a) cross section of a vegetative cell. Note the electrodense bodies (black arrows) and the starch granules and lipid globules (x39,600); (b) longitudinal section of an autospore. Note the disorganization of thylakoids and the nuclear chromatin dispersed (black arrows) (x21,200). c and d: cells exposed to 150 mg L -1 of chlorpyrifos; (c) longitudinal section of a vegetative cell. Note the electrodense bodies (white arrows) and the lipid globules (x9,100); (d) Longitudinal section of autospores inside the mother cell wall showing disorganized cytoplasm and numerous electrodense bodies (white arrows) (x12,000). (e) cross section of a vegetative cell exposed to50 mg L -1 of cypermethrin. Note the thylakoids and mitochondria disruption (x18,000). (f) longitudinal section of a vegetative cell exposed to100 mg L -1 of cypermethrin. Note the big and numerous lipid globules (x11,000). (g) cross section of a vegetative cell exposed to 60 mg L -1 of glyphosate. Note the big development of the condriome (x22,900). C: chloroplast; N: nucleus; D: dictyosome; rER: rough endoplasmic reticulum; M: mitochondrion; l: lipidic globule; t: thylakoids; s: starch granule; p: pyrenoid; n: nucleolus.
 
 (chlorpyrifos) and one herbicide (glyphosate), on the ultrastructure and growth of a non-target freshwater organism, the microalga Selenastrum capricornutum .
 Both  OPs  inhibited  the  growth  of S. capricornutum in  a  dose and time-dependent manner.  All  the  assayed  concentrations of  chlorpyrifos  inhibited  the  growth,  and concentrations of 18.75 mg L -1 onwards affected the cell volume. Similarly, all the concentrations of glyphosate assayed inhibited the growth, and concentrations of 21.6 mg L -1 onwards affected the cell volume.
 Despite the low persistence of chlorpyrifos in  aqueous  solution  ,  it has shown to be toxic to different non-target organism since similar growth inhibition was observed on Ankistrodesmus gracilis , Microcystis  wesenbergii , Dunaliella tertiolecta , Minutocellus polymorphus  and cladocerans , among others.
 In  the  present  study  we  observed  an effective  concentration  (EC 50 )  of  14.45  mg  L -1 for  chlorpyrifos.  However,  different  authors have  found  very  divergent  values,  since  the EC 50 for Spirulina  platensis was 33.65  mg  L -1 ,  for Merismopedia  sp. 25.80 mg L -1 ,  for Dunaliella tertiolecta 0.769 mg L -1 , for Minutocellus polymorphus 0.640 mg L -1 , for Chlorella  pyrenoidosa 3.736  mg  L -1 ,  for Pseudokirchneriella  subcapitata 2.060  mg  L -1 ,  indicating  that  the  toxicity of this pesticide varies widely between algae species. Besides, the sensitivity of invertebrates to chlorpyrifos has been demonstrated to be much higher than in algae, with EC 50 values for cladocerans between 0.07 and 0.1 µg L -1 .
 Regarding to glyphosate, we found an EC 50 of 15.6 mg L -1 for the commercial formulation Round-up ® .  Variations  not  only  in  species sensitivity to glyphosate but also in the response of  the  same  microalgae  species  to  different formulations are well documented. For instance, Lipok et al.  found values of EC 50 ranging from 2.9 to 118.1 mg L -1 examining the toxicity of a commercial formulation towards different phytoplankton species, including cyanobacteria and eukaryotic microalgae. Also, values of EC 50 of 79 mg L -1  and 5.81 mg L -1  were reported for Selenastrum capricornutum exposed to different commercial formulations.
 In the present study, we also evaluated the effect  of  cypermethrin  on S.  capricornutum . Synthetic pyrethroids are insecticides that have been introduced over the past three decades for domestic and agricultural use and are among the most widely used insecticides around the world . Cypermethrin has proved to be highly toxic to aquatic animals, especially to invertebrates , but the toxicity to freshwater algae has been considered low  since the 96 h EC 50 of cypermethrin to Scenedesmus obliquus was 112.45 mg L -1 . However, in the present study we found an EC 50 of 12.37 mg L -1 , indicating a higher toxicity of this pesticide to S. capricornutum .  Besides, all the assayed concentrations inhibited the growth, and  concentrations  of  12.5  mg  L -1 onwards affected the cell volume.
 According to the evidence, the response of different phytoplankton species to different pesticides  is  highly  variable.  Some  authors have related the higher toxicity with a greater surface/volume ratio . Wang et al.  related the high sensitivity to cypermethrin in Skeletonema costatum with a high growth rate.
 According to Sáenz et al.  the differences in sensitivity could be associated to differences in the cell wall structure. Besides, factors such as the initial cell density, test volume, exposure time,  together  with  the  specific  pesticide formulation  applied  can  condition  the  toxic effect explaining the variation in the EC 50 values .
 Some  authors  apply  only  the  active ingredients and others use different commercial formulates  in  the  assays,  since  pesticides are  generally  used  as  commercial  mixtures, synergistic  interactions  between  the  active ingredient  and  other  components  of  the formulations should be taken into consideration. In this regards, greater sensitivity of microalgae to commercial formulated than active ingredient has been reported . Therefore, toxicity tests using commercial formulations  are  more  realistic  in  assessing ecological risk of pesticides.
 Fortunately, the EC 50 values  found in the present study for chlorpyrifos and cypermethrin are  much  higher  than  the  values  found  in superficial waters . On the contrary, the EC 50 found for glyphosate is close to the range of concentrations recorded in some water bodies ,  suggesting  that  this  compound  could have  more  dangerous  consequences  in  the environment. Besides, the decrease of the EC 50 with  the  exposure  time  indicates  a  chronic effect probably owing to the accumulation of the pesticides inside the cell.
 Studies about the effect of pesticides on algal cell structure are scarce and most of the information came from studies using wastewater  or heavy metals . In the present study the most significant damages observed on the cellular  ultrastructure  included:  thylakoids and  mitochondria  disruption,  formation  of electrodense  bodies,  accumulation  of  lipids and increase in the size and number of starch granules.
 In S.  capricornutum cells  exposed  to chlorpyrifos and cypermethrin an increase in the number and size of starch granules was observed, similar alteration was observed in other  microalgae  under  situations  of  stress by  toxicants  like Ankistrodesmus  gracilis exposed  to  chlorpyrifos  , Chlamydomonas  bullosa exposed  to cooper and cadmium , Pseudochlorococcum  typicum exposed  to mercury, lead and cadmium , Chlorella fusca exposed to wastewater with high content of chlorophenol , and Scendesmus vacuolatus exposed to glyphosate . According to Shanab et al. , the starch granules might act as energy reserve  to  the  cells  after  the  deterioration of  organelles,  especially  chloroplasts  and mitochondria.
 In  cells  exposed  to  chlorpyrifos,  electrodense bodies were observed. This alteration was also observed in Ankistrodesmus gracilis exposed to the same insecticide , Pseudochlorococcum typicum exposed to lead  and Chlamydomonas sp. exposed to cadmium . The structure of the electrodense bodies was very similar to that of polyphosphate bodies of cyanobacteria. Compartmentalization of toxic substances in polyphosphate bodies has been well documented  and has been recognized as a mechanism that may contribute to  heavy  metal  tolerance  by  minimizing  as possible the cytoplasmic metal concentrations . Also, among the many functions attributed to polyphosphates, they have  been  mentioned  as  a  mean  of  storing
 energy , which would be especially useful in cells with big damages in chloroplasts and mitochondria.
 Accumulation  of  lipid  globules  was observed in the cytoplasm of cells exposed to the three pesticides. The presence of large lipid bodies has also been reported by Asselborn et al.  in cells of Ankistrodesmus gracilis exposed to chlorpyrifos, by Tukaj et al.  in Scenedesmus microspina cells exposed to diesel fuel oil and by Rachlin et al.  in Anabaena variabilis and A. flos -aquae cells exposed to zinc. According to Guanzon et al.  lipids in algae also serve to either store or absorb pesticides in cell membranes, then the increase in the size and number of lipid globules could represents another detoxification mechanism of the cells exposed to contaminants.
 The  sequestration  of  compounds  into intracellular vacuoles and compartments is a recognized  mechanism  of  detoxification  of metals and xenobiotic, including pesticides, in plants and algae ; however, to elucidate if both lipid globules and electrodense bodies represent mechanisms of pesticides detoxification in S. capricornutum further studies will be needed.
 In  the  present  study  the  exposure  to the  three  pesticides  caused  an  increase  in the  volume  of S.  capricornutum cells,  with the  highest  percent  increase  registered  for chlorpyrifos.  Changes  in  algal  biovolume resulting from the exposure to pesticides have been reported by several authors: Asselborn et al.  reported an increase of more than 70% in the cell volume of Ankistrodesmus gracilis exposed  to  75  mg  L -1 of  chlorpyrifos,  Kent  &amp; Weinberger  reported an increase in the cell  volume  of Selenastrum  capricornutum , Chlorella  pyrenoidosa and Chlamydomonas segnis exposed to 1 - 10 mg L -1 of the insecticide fenitrothion, Skeletonema costatum giant cells were observed in treatments with the insecticide ethoprop  ,  and  an increase in Scenedesmus vacuolatus cells was registered under concentrations of glyphosate form 4 to 8 mg L -1 .
 Some authors have related the increase in cell size to alterations in the cell cycle since they observed an uncoupling of the growth phase and  the  division  phase,  i.e.,  cells  increased their volume and mass and suffered multiple nuclear replications but cytokinesis was delayed . In S. capricornutum exposed  to  chlorpyrifos  and glyphosate alterations in the cell cycle were observed since at the highest concentration of chlorpyrifos the cell-separation phase was inhibited, whereas at the highest concentration of glyphosate the formation of autospores could not be evidenced. Then, the alteration in the cell cycle together with accumulation of different compounds inside  the  cells,  namely  starch, lipids and polyphosphates, could account for the increase in the biovolume of S. capricornutum observed after exposure to different pesticides.
 Since algae are the primary producers in aquatic food webs, the biomass, diversity and structure of phytoplankton influence directly the stability and functioning of aquatic ecosystems. The great variability in the sensitivity to toxic compounds between species has potentially significant ecological implications, affecting the community structure. The destruction of the photosynthetic apparatus decreases the primary production and, consequently, the transference of energy to superior trophic levels. Besides, the  increase  in  cell  volume  of  microalgae could affect the food availability for primary consumers, thus affecting also the structure of zooplankton community.
 ## CONCLUSION
 The  results  from  the  present  study  clearly showed the toxic effects of the three pesticides on population growth and cell morphology and ultrastructure of Selenastrum capricornutum . The insecticide cypermethrin showed the higher toxic  effect  on  population  growth,  however higher ultrastructural damage was produced by the herbicide glyphosate. Besides, the EC50 for glyphosate was close to the concentrations found in some superficial waters indicating a higher ecological risk for this compound.
 ## Acknowledgments
 This study was supported by Universidad Nacional del Sur under grant PGI 24/B234 and by Universidad Nacional del  Sur  and  Consejo  Nacional  de  Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas under grant PIO 20720150100019CO. E.R.P.  and  C.F.  are  research  members of the Consejo Nacional  de  Investigaciones  Científicas  y  Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina.
 ## REFERENCES
 ADAM O, BADOT P, DEGIORGI F &amp; CRINI G. 2009. Mixture toxicity assessment  of  wood  preservative  pesticides  in  the freshwater amphipod Gammarus pulex (L.).  Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 72: 441-449.
 AGUILERA A &amp; AMILS R. 2005. Tolerance to cadmium in Chlamydomonas sp. (Chlorophyta) strains isolated from an extreme acidic environment, the Tinto River (SW, Spain). Aquat Toxicol 75: 316-329.
 AMWEG EL, WESTON DP &amp; UREDA NM. 2005. Use and toxicity of pyrethroid pesticides in the Central Valley, California, USA. Environ Toxicol Chem 24: 966-972.
 ANTON FA, ARIZ M &amp; ALIA M. 1993. Ecotoxic effects of four herbicides  (glyphosate,  alachlor,  chlortoluron  and isoproturon) on the algae Chlorella pyrenoidosa Chick. Sc Total Environm 134: 845-851.
 ASSELBORN V, FERNÁNDEZ C, ZALOCAR Y &amp; PARODI ER. 2015. Effects of chlorpyrifos on the growth and ultrastructure of  green  algae, Ankistrodesmus  gracilis .  Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 120: 334-341.
 ATICI T,  AHISKA S, ALTINDA A &amp; AYDIN D. 2008. Ecological effects of some heavy metals (Cd, Pb, Hg, Cr) pollution of phytoplanktonic algae and zooplanktonic organisms in Sarıyar Dam Reservoir in Turkey. Afr J Biotechnol 7: 1972-1977.
 BAOS R, GARCIA-VILLADA L, AGRELO M, LOPEZ-RODAS V, HIRALDO F &amp; COSTAS E. 2002. Short-term adaptation of microalgae in highly stressful environments: an experimental model analyzing the resistance of Scenedesmus intermedius (Chlorophyceae) to the heavy metals mixture from the Aznalcollar mine spill. Eur J Phycol 37: 593-600.
 BHUVANESWARI GR, PURUSHOTHAMAN CS, PANDEY PK, GUPTA S,  KUMAR  HS  &amp;  SHUKLA  SP.  2018.  Toxicological  effects of  chlorpyrifos  on  growth,  chlorophyll  a  synthesis and  enzyme  activity  of  a  cyanobacterium Spirulina (Arthrospira) platensis .  Int  J  Curr  Microbiol App Sci 7: 2980-2990.
 BONANSEA RI, AMÉ MV &amp; WUNDERLIN DA. 2013. Determination of priority pesticides in water samples combining SPE and SPME coupled to GC-MS. A case study: Suquía River basin (Argentina). Chemosphere 90: 1860-1869.
 BRAY DF, BAGU JR &amp; NAKAMURA K. 1993. Ultrastructure of Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii following  exposure  to paraquat: comparison of wild type and a paraquatresistant mutant. Can J Botany 71: 174-182.
 CARRIGER JF, RAND GM, GARDINALI PR, PERRY WB, TOMPKINS MS &amp; FERNANDEZ AM. 2006. Pesticides of potential ecological concern  in  sediment  from  South  Florida  canals:  an ecological risk prioritization for aquatic arthropods. Soil Sediment Contam 15: 21-45.
 CLARK J, GOODMAN L, BORTHWICK P, PATRICK J, CRIPE G, MOODY P,  MOORE J &amp; LORES E.  1989.  Toxicity  of  pyrethroids  to marine invertebrates and fish: a literature review and test results with sediment-sorbed chemicals. Environ Toxicol Chem 8: 393-401.
 COLEMAN J, BLAKE-KALFF M &amp; DAVIES E. 1997. Detoxification of  xenobiotics by plants: chemical modification and vacuolar compartmentation. Trends Plant Sci 2: 144-151.
 DE  A,  BOSE  R,  KUMAR  A  &amp;  MOZUMDAR  S.  2014.  Targeted delivery of pesticides using biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles.  Springer  Briefs  in  Molecular  Science, Berlin: Springer, 99 p.
 DELORENZO ME &amp; SERRANO L. 2003. Individual and mixture toxicity of three pesticides; atrazine, chlorpyrifos, and chlorothalonil to the marine phytoplankton species Dunaliella tertiolecta . J Environ Sci Health B 38: 529-538.
 DODGE JD. 1973. The fine structure of algal cells. London, New York: Academic press, 274 p.
 ## CAROLINA FERNÁNDEZ , VIANA ASSELBORN &amp; ELISA R. PARODI
 ENVIRONMENT  CANADA.  2007.  Biological  test  method: growth inhibition test using a freshwater alga. Series Report EPS 1/RM/25. ERNST W, JACKMAN P, DOE K, PAGE F, JULIEN G, MACKAY K &amp; SUTHERLAND T. 2001. Dispersion and toxicity to non-target aquatic organisms of pesticides used to treat sea lice on salmon in net pen enclosures. Mar Pollut Bull 42: 433-444. ETCHEGOYEN  MA,  RONCO  AE,  ALMADA  P,  ABELANDO  M  &amp; MARINO DJ. 2017. Occurrence and fate of pesticides in the Argentine stretch of the Paraguay-Paraná basin. Environ Monit Assess 189: 63. FINNEY DJ. 1971. Probit Analysis, 3rd ed., London: Cambridge University Press, 333 p. FOGG GE. 1987. Algal Cultures and Phytoplankton Ecology. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press, 273 p. GAO  J,  LIU  L,  LIU  X,  ZHOU  H,  LU  J,  HUANG  S  &amp;  WANG  Z. 2009.  The  occurrence  and  spatial  distribution  of organophosphorous pesticides in Chinese surface water. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 82: 223-229. GILLION RJ ET AL. 2006. The Quality of Our Nation's Waters - Pesticides in the nation's streams and ground water, 1992-2001. United States Geological Survey Circular 1291. GÓMEZ DE BARREDA FERRAZ D, SABATER C &amp; CARRASCO JM. 2004. Effects of propanil, tebufenozide and mefenacet on growth of four freshwater species of phytoplankton: a microplate bioassay. Chemosphere 56: 315-320. GUANZON NG, FUKUDA M &amp; NAKAHARA H. 1996. Accumulation of agricultural pesticides by three freshwater microalgae. Fish Sci 62: 690-697. HILL IR. 1989. Aquatic organisms and pyrethroids. Pest Sci 27: 429-465. IUMMATO  MM,  FASSIANO  A,  GRAZIANO  M,  DOS  SANTOS AFONSO M, RÍOS DE MOLINA MC &amp; JUÁREZ AB. 2019. Effect of glyphosate on the growth, morphology, ultrastructure and metabolism of Scenedesmus vacuolatus. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 172: 471-479. JENSEN TE &amp; RACHLIN JW. 1984. Effect of varying sulphur deficiency on structural components of a cyanobacterium Synechococcus  leopoliensis :  a  morphometric  study. Cytobios 41: 35-46. JERGENTZ  S,  MUGNI  H,  BONETTO  C  &amp;  SCHULZ  R.  2005. Assessment of insecticide contamination in runoff and stream water of small agricultural streams in the main soybean area of Argentina. Chemosphere 61: 817-826.
 KENT  RA  &amp;  WEINBERGER  P.  1991.  Multibiological-level responses of freshwater phytoplankton to pesticides stress. Environ Toxicol Chem 10: 209-216. KIM HH, LIM YW, YANG JY, SHIN DC, HAM HS, CHOI BS &amp; LEE JY. 2013. Health risk assessment of exposure to chlorpyrifos and dichlorvos in children at childcare facilities. Sci Total Environ 444: 441-450. KULAEV IS &amp; VAGABOV VM. 1983. Polyphosphate metabolism in micro-organisms. Adv Microb Physiol 24: 83-171. LARI S, KHAN NA, GANDHI KN, MESHRAM TS &amp; THACKER NP. 2014. Comparison of pesticide residues in surface water and ground water of agriculture intensive areas. J Environ Health Sci Eng 12: 11. LIPOK J,  STUDNIK H &amp; GRUYAERT S.  2010.  The  toxicity  of Roundup 360 SL formulation and its main constituents: Glyphosate  and  isopropylamine  towards  non-target water  photoautotrophs.  Ecotoxicol  Environ  Saf  73: 1681-1688. MARINO D &amp; RONCO A. 2005. Cypermethrin and chlorpyrifos concentration levels  in  surface  water  bodies  of  the Pampa Ondulada, Argentina. B Environ Contam Tox 75: 820-826. MAYER-PINTO M, COLEMAN RA, UNDERWOOD AJ &amp; TOLHURST TJ. 2011. Effects of zinc on microalgal biofilms in intertidal and subtidal habitats. Biofouling 27: 721-727. MIAZEK K &amp; BROZEK-PLUSKA B. 2019. Effect of PHRs and PCPs on microalgal growth, metabolism and microalgaebased bioremediation processes: a review. Int J Mol Sci 20: 2492. MORO  CV,  BRICHEUX  G,  PORTELLI  C  &amp;  BOHATIER  J.  2012. Comparative effects of the herbicides chlortoluron and mesotrione on freshwater microalgae. Environ Toxicol Chem 31: 778-786. NARULA P, MAHAJAN A, GURNANI C, KUMAR V &amp; MUKHIJA S. 2015. Microalgae as an indispensable tool against heavy metals toxicity to plants: a review. Int J Pharm Sci Rev Res 31: 86-93. NIE J, SUN Y, ZHOU Y, KUMAR M, USMAN M, LI J, SHAO J, WANG L &amp; TSANG DCW. 2020. Bioremediation of water containing pesticides by microalgae: Mechanisms, methods, and prospects for future research. Sci Total Environ 707: 36080.
 OECD - ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT. 2011. OECD guidelines for the testing of chemicals. Section 2: effects on biotic systems. Test 201: freshwater alga and cyanobacteria, growth inhibition test. Paris: OECD Publishing.
 PABLO F,  KRASSOI  FR,  JONES  PRF,  COLVILLE  AE,  HOSE  GC  &amp; LIM RP.  2008.  Comparison of the fate and toxicity of chlorpyrifos - Laboratory versus a coastal mesocosm system. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 71: 219-229. PERALES-VELA HV, PEÑA-CASTRO JM &amp; CAÑIZARES-VILLANUEVA RO.  2006.  Heavy  Metal  Detoxification  in  Eukaryotic Microalgae. Chemosphere 64: 1-10. PEREIRA JL, ANTUNES SC, CASTRO BB, MARQUES CR, GONÇALVES AMM, GONÇALVES F &amp; PEREIRA R. 2009. Toxicity evaluation of  three  pesticides  on  non-target  aquatic  and  soil organisms:  commercial  formulation  versus  active ingredient. Ecotoxicology 18: 455-463. PÉREZ  J,  DOMINGUES  I,  SOARES  AM  &amp;  LOUREIRO  S.  2011. Growth rate of Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata exposed to herbicides found in surface waters in the Alqueva reservoir (Portugal): a bottom-up approach using binary mixtures. Ecotoxicology 20: 1167-1175. QIAN H, LI J, PAN X, SUN Z, YE C, JIN G &amp; FU Z. 2012. Effects of streptomycin on growth of algae Chlorella vulgaris and Microcystis aeruginosa . Environ Toxicol 27: 229-237. QUIGG A, REINFELDER JR &amp; FISHER NS. 2006. Copper uptake kinetics  in  diverse  marine  phytoplankton.  Limnol Oceanogr 51: 893-899. RACHLIN JW, JENSEN TE &amp; WARKENTINE BE. 1985. Morphometric analysis  of  the  response  of  Anabaena  flos-aquae and Anabaena variabilis (Cyanophyceae) to selected concentrations of zinc. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 14: 395-402. RASMUSSEN  JJ,  WIBERG-LARSEN  P,  BAATTRUP-PEDERSEN A,  CEDERGREEN  N,  MCKNIGHT  US,  KREUGER  J,  JACOBSEN  D, KRISTENSEN EA &amp; FRIBERG N. 2015. The legacy of pesticide pollution:  an  overlooked  factor  in  current  risk assessments of freshwater systems. Water Res 84: 25-32. REYMOND OL  &amp;  PICKETT-HEAPS  JD.  1982.  A  routine  flat embedding  method  for  electron  microscopy  of microorganisms  allowing  selection  and  precisely oriented sectioning of single cells by light microscopy. J Microsc 130: 79-84. RIBEIRO F, GALLEGO-URREA JA, GOODHEAD RM, VAN GESTEL CA, MOGER J, SOARES AM &amp; LOUREIRO S. 2014. Uptake and elimination kinetics of silver nanoparticles and silver nitrate by Raphidocelis subcapitata :  the  influence of silver behaviour in solution. Nanotoxicology 1: 1-10. RIOBOO C, GONZÁLEZ O, HERRERO C &amp; CID A. 2002. Physiological response of freshwater microalga ( Chlorella vulgaris ) to triazine and phenylurea herbicides. Aquat Toxicol 59: 225-235.
 RONCO A, CARRIQUIRIBORDE P, NATALE GS, MARTIN M, MUGNI H  &amp;  BONETTO  C.  2008.  Integrated  approach  for  the assessment of biotech soybean pesticides impact on low order stream ecosystems of the Pampasic region. In: Chen J &amp; Guo C (Eds), Ecosystem Ecology Research Trends, Nova Science Publisher Inc, p. 209-239. ROSELL G, QUERO C, COLL J &amp; GUERRERO A. 2008. Biorational insecticides in pest management. J Pestic Sci 33: 103-121. SABATER C &amp; CARRASCO JM. 2001a. Effects of pyridaphenthion on growth of five freshwater species of phytoplankton. A laboratory study. Chemosphere 44: 1775-1781. SABATER  C  &amp;  CARRASCO  JM.  2001b.  Effects  of  the organophosphorus insecticide fenitrothion on growth in  five  freshwater species of phytoplankton. Environ Toxicol 16: 314-320. SABATER  C,  CUESTA  A  &amp;  CARRASCO  R.  2002.  Effects  of bensulfuron-methyl and cinosulfuron on growth of four freshwater species of phytoplankton. Chemosphere 46: 953-960. SABATINI SE, JUÁREZ AB, EPPIS M, BIANCHI L, LUQUET C &amp; MOLINA M. 2009. Oxidative stress and antioxidant defenses in two green microalgae exposed to copper. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 72: 1200-1206. SÁENZ ME, ACCORINTI J &amp; TORTORELLI MC. 1993. Toxicity of paraquat to a green algae Scenedesmus acutus . J Environ Sci Heal B 28: 193-204. SÁENZ ME, DI MARZIO WD &amp; ALBERDI JL. 2012. Effects of a commercial formulation of cypermethrin used in biotech soybean crops on growth and antioxidant enzymes of freshwater algae. Int J Environ Protec 2: 15-22. SÁENZ ME, DI MARZIO WD, ALBERDI JL &amp; TORTORELLI MC. 1997. Effects of technical grade and a commercial formulation of  gliphosate on algal population growth. B Environ Contam Tox 59: 638-634. SCHÄFER RB, VAN DEN BRINK PJ &amp; LIESS M. 2011. Impacts of pesticides on freshwater ecosystems. In: Sánchez-Bayo F  et  al.  (Eds),  Ecological  impacts  of  toxic  chemicals, Bentham Science Publisher, p. 111-137. SCHULZ R. 2004. Field studies on exposure, effects, and risk mitigation of aquatic nonpoint-source insecticide pollution: A review. J Environ Qual 33: 419-448. SHANAB S, ESSA A &amp; SHALABY E. 2012. Bioremoval capacity of  three  heavy  metals  by  some  microalgae  species (Egyptian Isolates). Plant Signal Behav 7: 392-399. SPURR AR. 1969. A low-viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium for electronmicroscopy. J Ultrastruct Res 26: 31-43.
 STACHOWSKI-HABERKORN S, JÉRÔME M, ROUXEL J, KHELIFI C &amp; KHELIfI C, RINCÉ M &amp; BURGEOT T. 2013. Multigenerational exposure of the microalga Tetraselmis suecica to diuron leads  to  spontaneous  long-term  strain  adaptation. Aquat Toxicol 140: 80-388.
 STEIN  JR.  1973.  Handbook  of  phycological  methods. Culture methods and growth measurements, London: Cambridge University Press, 472 p.
 STREIT B &amp; KUHN K. 1994. Effects of organophosphorous insecticides  on  autochthonous  and  introduced Gammarus species. Water Sci Technol 29: 233-240.
 SUMAN TY, RAJASREE SR &amp; KIRUBAGARAN R. 2015. Evaluation of zinc oxide nanoparticles toxicity on marine algae Chlorella vulgaris through flow cytometric, cytotoxicity and oxidative stress analysis. Ecotox Environ Saf 113: 23-30.
 SUN J &amp; LIU D. 2003. Geometric models for calculating cell biovolume and surface area for phytoplankton. J Plankton Res 25: 1331-1346.
 SUN KF, XU XR, DUAN SS, WANG YS, CHENG H, ZHANG ZW, ZHOU GJ &amp; HONG YG. 2015. Ecotoxicity of two organophosphate pesticides chlorpyrifos and dichlorvos on non-targeting cyanobacteria Microcystis wesenbergii . Ecotoxicology 24: 1498-1507.
 TSABOULA  A,  PAPADAKIS  E-N,  VRYZAS  Z,  KOTOPOULOU  A, KINTZIKOGLOU  K  &amp;  PAPADOPOULOU-MOURKIDOU  E.  2018. Assessment and management of pesticide pollution at a riverbasin level part I: aquatic ecotoxicological quality indices. Sci Total Environ 653: 1597-1611.
 TSUI MTK &amp; CHU LM. 2003. Aquatic toxicity of glyphosatebased  formulations:  comparison  between  different organisms and the effects of environmental factors. Chemosphere 52: 1189-1197.
 TUKAJ Z, BOHDANOWICZ J &amp; AKSMANN A. 1998. A morphometric and stereological analysis of ultrastructural changes in two Scenedesmus (Chlorococcales, Chlorophyta) strains subjected to diesel fuel oil pollution. Phycologia 37: 388-393.
 USEPA -  U.S.  ENVIRONMENTAL  PROTECTION  AGENCY.  2002. Short-term methods for estimating the chronic toxicity of effluents and receiving water to freshwater organisms. EPA-821-R-02-013.
 VARCA LM.  2012.  Pesticide  residues  in  surface  waters of  Pagsanjan-Lumban  catchment  of  Laguna  de  Bay, Philippines. Agr Water Manage 106: 35-41.
 VENDRELL E, FERRAZ DG, SABATER C &amp; CARRASCO JM. 2009. Effect of glyphosate on growth of four freshwater species of phytoplankton: a microplate bioassay. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 82: 538-542.
 VISVIKI I &amp; RACHLIN JW. 1994. Acute and chronic exposure of Dunaliella salina and Chlamydomonas bullosa to copper and cadmium: effects on ultrastructure. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 26: 154-162.
 VOLLAND S, ANDOSCH A, MILLA M, STÖGER B, LÜTZ C &amp; LÜTZMEINDL U. 2011. Intracellular metal compartmentalization in the green algal model system Micrasterias denticulata (Streptophyta)  measured  by  transmission  electron microscopy-coupled electron energy loss spectroscopy. J Phycol 47: 565-579.
 WALSH GE &amp; ALEXANDER SV. 1980. A marine algal bioassay method results with pesticides and industrial wastes. Water Air Soil Poll 13: 45-55.
 WALSH GE, MCLAUGHLIN LL, YODER MJ, MOODY PH, LORES EH, FORESTER J &amp; WESSINGER-DUVALL PB. 1988. Minutocellus polymorphus :  a  new  marine  diatom  for  use  in  algal toxicity tests. Environ Toxicol Chem 7: 925-929.
 WANG Z, YANG Y, YUE W, KANG W, LIANG W &amp; LI W. 2010. The growth behavior of three marine phytoplankton species in the presence of commercial cypermethrin. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 73: 1408-1414.
 WANG Z &amp; YIN Y. 1997. Studies of toxicity of pyrethroid insecticide (crude product and commodity grades) and solvents to aquatic organisms. J Jinan Univ 18: 98-103. (in Chinese with English abstract).
 WENDT-RASCH L, PIRZADEH P &amp; WOIN P. 2003. Effects of metsulfuron  methyl  and  cypermethrin  exposure  on freshwater model ecosystems. Aquat Toxicol 63: 243-256.
 WONG  PK  &amp;  CHANG  L. 1988. The  effects  and organophosphorus i n s e c t i c i d e s on growth, photosynthesis,  and  chlorophyll  a  synthesis  of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (mt+).  Environ Pollut 55: 179-189.
 WONG SL, NAKAMOTO L &amp; WAINWRIGHT JF. 1994. Identification of  toxic  metals  in  affected  algal  cells  in  assays  of wastewaters. J Appl Phycol 6: 405-414.
 XIONG L, XIE P, SHENG X, WU Z &amp; XIE L.  2005.  Toxicity  of cypermethrin  on  growth,  pigments,  and  superoxide dismutase of Scenedesmus obliquus . Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 60: 188-192.
 ZALIZNIAK L. 2006. The effects of selected agricultural chemicals on freshwater microalgae and cladocerans in  laboratory  studies,  with  particular  emphasis  on hormesis. PhD Dissertation, RMIT University, Australia.
 ZAR JH. 2010. Biostatistical Analysis, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 944 p.
 ## How to cite
 FERNÁNDEZ  C,  ASSELBORN  V &amp;  PARODI  ER.  2021.  Toxic  effects  of chlorpyrifos, cypermethrin and glyphosate on the non-target organism Selenastrum  capricornutum (Chlorophyta).  An  Acad  Bras  Cienc  93: e20200233. DOI 10.1590/0001-3765202120200233.
 Manuscript received on  February 16, 2020; accepted for publication on August 30, 2020
 ## CAROLINA FERNÁNDEZ 1,2
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2193-0536
 ## VIVIANA ASSELBORN 3
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8773-2049
 ## ELISA R. PARODI 1,3
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8641-229X
 1 Instituto Argentino de Oceanografía, Universidad Nacional del Sur (UNS) - CONICET, Camino Carrindanga 7.5 Km, B8000FWB Bahía Blanca, Argentina
 2 Centro de Emprendedorismo y Desarrollo Territorial Sostenible (CEDETS), Universidad Provincial del Sudoeste (UPSO) - Comisión de Investigaciones Científicas de la Provincia de Buenos Aires (CIC), Ciudad de Cali 320, B8003FTH Bahía Blanca, Argentina
 3 Departamento de Biología, Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional del Sur, San Juan 670, B8000FTN, Bahía Blanca, Argentina
 Correspondence to:
 Carolina Fernández
 E-mail: carofer@criba.edu.ar
 ## Author contributions
 Carolina Fernández: Conceptualization, formal analysis, writing of the original draft, review and editing of the final version. Viviana Asselborn: Conceptualization and investigation. Elisa R. Parodi: Supervision and funding acquisition.
 