
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
 ## Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology
 j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pest
 ## Cypermethrin-induced alterations in vital physiological parameters and oxidative balance in Caenorhabditis elegans
 Shivaiah Shashikumar, P.S. Rajini *
 Food Protectants and Infestation Control Department, Central Food Technological Research Institute (CSIR Lab), Mysore 570 020, India
 ## a r t i c l e i n f o
 Article history: Received 30 September 2009 Accepted 2 March 2010 Available online 19 March 2010
 Keywords: Cypermethrin Caenorhabditis elegans Egg laying Brood size Feeding Lifespan
 Oxidative stress
 ## 1. Introduction
 Pyrethroids are widely used as pest control agents in a wide array of indoor and outdoor applications, including medicinal, veterinary and agricultural scenario  and are the synthetic derivative of natural pyrethrins with greater potency and environmental stability . They are subdivided into two groups according to their chemical structures - type-I pyrethroids are devoid of a 'cyano' moiety at the a -position while type-II pyrethroids have an a -cyano moiety . Action of these two classes is primarily on the sodium channels of nerve. While type-I produces repetitive neuronal discharge and prolonged negative after potential, type-II pyrethroids produce even longer delay in sodium channel inactivation leading to persistent depolarization of the nerve membrane .
 Cypermethrin (CYP), the a -cyano-3-phenoxybenzyl ester of 2,2dimethyl-3-(2,2-dichlorovinyl)-2-2-dimethyl cyclopropane carboxylate, is the most commonly used type-II pyrethroid insecticide. It is a photostable, potent synthetic pyrethroid exhibiting broad-spectrum insecticidal action with low mammalian toxicity  and is employed to control many pests including pests of fruits and vegetable crops. CYP exerts its neurotoxic effects through voltage-dependent sodium channel  and integral protein ATPase in the neuronal membrane . Recent in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that CYP produces reactive oxygen species (ROS) and thus
 * Corresponding author. Fax: +91 0821 2517233. E-mail address: rajini29@yahoo.com (P.S. Rajini).
 ## a b s t r a c t
 Cypermethrin belongs to the class of synthetic pyrethroids, which are being widely used as an insecticides in agricultural practices. The toxicity of cypermethrin is well studied in Drosophila melanogaster , fish, rats, mice, and is reported to cause neurotoxicity and oxidative stress during its metabolism. In this study, we evaluated the biological consequences of 4 h exposure to cypermethrin at sublethal concentrations (1, 5 and 15 mM) in Caenorhabditis elegans on physiological parameters such as egg laying, brood size, feeding and lifespan and oxidative stress parameters such as ROS, hydrogen peroxide levels, protein carbonyl, enzymatic antioxidants and glutathione levels. There was a significant and dose-dependent decrease in brood size (18-53%), egg laying (54-67%), feeding (29-58%) and marked decrease in lifespan (20%) at 15 mM of cypermethrin. Increase in levels of oxidative markers such as ROS (21-56%), intracellular hydrogen peroxide (17-62%), protein carbonyl (8-29%) and alteration in the activity of enzymatic antioxidants as well as depletion of glutathione (13-38%) were also observed. Our study offers evidence to show that cypermethrin induces significant oxidative stress in C. elegans and alters several physiological parameters in these worms, which can lead to impaired functioning, and survival of these worms.
 /C211 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
 induces oxidative stress . Induction of oxidative stress during its metabolism is also based on the evidence that excitatory events may stimulate ROS production during the cleavage of CYP . Thus although oxidative stress may not be the fundamental cause of toxicity of CYP, a variety of specific mechanism may lead to oxidative damage on exposure to CYP. CYP is also reported to possess the potential to cause endocrine disruption . CYP was well studied in Drosophila melanogaster , fish  and higher mammalian systems viz., rat  and mice  but there are no reports on its toxicity in the invertebrate model, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans .
 Over the past decade, issues of animal use and care in toxicology research and testing have become one of the fundamental concern for both science and ethics, and emphasis has been placed on the use of alternatives to mammals in testing, research and education. C. elegans is one among the widely used invertebrate model organism because of its well-elucidated genetics and developmental biology. The use of C. elegans has been recommended by the European Center for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM), whose goal is to promote the scientific and regulatory acceptance of alternative methods, which reduce, refine or replace the use of laboratory animals . C. elegans is a saprophytic nematode species, possessing many traits of favorable usage as a biological model. C. elegans has a transparent body approximately 1 mm in length, and serves as a reliable model organism because it possesses (1) short life cycle (3 days at 20 /C176 C), (2) short life span and (3) ease rearing in the laboratory with large number progeny
 
 of 300-350 per worm . In addition, it is a simple multicellular eukaryote whose developmental process and behavior can be easily monitored. C. elegans has been frequently used in ecotoxicolgical studies . Toxicity studies with C. elegans have been focused from the beginning on the mortality but more other sensitive physiological parameters such as reproduction (more sensitive experiment then LC50 determination) , movement , feeding and growth , lifespan  and expression of small heat shock proteins .
 Recently, C. elegans has been employed to study the oxidative stress inducing potential of several xenobiotics such as juglone and paraquat . In vivo exposure to these toxicants induced oxidative stress by increasing reactive oxygen species and altering antioxidant enzymes and antioxidant molecules. In C. elegans the defense mechanism involves enzymatic antioxidants viz., superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase glutathione reductase, glutathioneS -transferase and reduced glutathione are well studied .
 In the present study, we demonstrated the toxicity of cypermethrin in C. elegans on sublethal exposure based on physiological parameters viz., egg laying, brood size, life span and feeding and also on the extent of oxidative stress induction by measuring the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), intracellular hydrogen peroxide levels, protein carbonyl content and activity of antioxidant enzymes and non-enzymatic antioxidant levels.
 ## 2. Materials and methods
 ## 2.1. Materials
 Cypermethrin (Technical grade, 92% pure) was a gift from Hyderabad Chemicals Ltd., Hyderabad, India. 2,7-Dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA), 2,7-dichloroflurorescein (DCF), 5-fluro2-deoxyuridine (FudR), quercetin, N , N , N , N -tetramethyethylenediamine (TMEDA), ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), glutathione reductase (GR) and amino trizole (ATZ) were procured from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). Xylenol, sorbitol, 2,4-dinitro-phenyl hydrazine (DNPH), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), trichloroacetic acid (TCA), reduced glutathione (GSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG). 1-Chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB), t -butylhydroperoxide ( t -BHP), Tris-HCl and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) were procured from Sisco Research Laboratories (Mumbai, India). All other chemicals used were of analytical grade.
 Caenorhabditis elegans , wild-type strain (N2), was obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC, Minneapolis, MN, USA), which is funded by the NIH National Center for Research Resources (NCRR).
 ## 2.2. Worm culture
 The worms were cultivated on NGM plates (3 g l /C0 1 NaCl, 2.5 g l /C0 1 proteose peptone, 5 mg l /C0 1 cholesterol, 1 mmol l /C0 1 CaCl2, 1 mmol l /C0 1 MgSO4, 25 mmol l /C0 1 potassium phosphate, pH 6.0, 17 g l /C0 1 agar) on an established lawn of Escherichia coli strain OP50  and maintained at 20 /C176 C. To obtain synchronized culture, gravid hermaphrodites were lysed in an alkaline hypochlorite solution  and the eggs were seeded in fresh NGM plates. The culture was grown for 3 days at 20 /C176 C until the newly hatched worms reached adulthood. The L4 stage worms/gravid worms were washed with K-medium (53 mM NaCl, 32 mM KCl) , pelleted by centrifugation (3000 g , 5 min), washed again thrice with cold K-medium and finally suspended in K-medium to obtain 30-50 nematodes per 10 l l.
 ## 2.3. Egg laying assay
 Egg laying rates were determined by placing age-synchronized adult worms in 24-well tissues culture plates with NGM agar media (10 worms per well) with CYP incorporated at varying concentrations (0, 1, 5 and 15 mM). For each test condition tested, the assays were repeated 12 times, thus using a total of 120 worms. The number of eggs laid during 1 h of exposure to CYP was counted .
 ## 2.4. Brood size
 Age synchronized adult worms (L4 stage) were exposed to different concentrations of cypermethrin (0, 1, 5 and 15 mM) for 4 h at 20 /C176 C. After exposure, the worms were washed with K-medium and a single worm was picked and transferred to 12-well tissue culture plates containing 1 ml K-medium, which contained E. coli at a dilution of 1 OD at 550 nm. The plates were incubated at 20 /C176 C for 72 h. After 72 h, the worms were washed, pelleted and the progeny was counted under the dissecting microscope . For each test concentration and control the average number of mean progeny from three wells was obtained for each test replicate and the testing was repeated three times.
 ## 2.5. Feeding assay
 Assays were performed in 12-well plates. Aliquots of K-medium with E. coli suspended at a concentration of 1.0 OD (at 550 nm) were dispensed into the wells. CYP was added to the wells at different concentrations (0, 1, 5 and 15 mM). The worms suspended in K-medium were added to the wells such that each well had 5000 worms. The total volume in each well was 1 ml. The plate was incubated at 25 /C176 C with constant shaking. One milliliter sample was drawn at 1 h intervals, spun gently for 20 s at 800 rpm and the absorbance of the supernatant was determined at 550 nm. The samples were returned to the culture plate for further incubation .
 ## 2.6. Lifespan
 Age synchronized adult worms (L4 stage) were exposed to different concentrations of cypermethrin (0, 1, 5 and 15 mM) for 4 h at 20 /C176 C. After the exposure period, worms were washed thrice with K-medium and 20 ±1 L4 worms (designated as Day 0 of life span estimate) were placed in a well of 15 mm flat bottomed 24well plates, each well containing 500 l l of K-medium (OD at 550 nm adjusted to 1.0 with E. coli cells) and FudR at a final concentration of 50 l M . Worms were raised and maintained at 20 /C176 C. The survivability was scored every day by gentle touching with platinum wire. The worms, which failed to move in response to touch, were considered as dead.
 ## 2.7. Measurement of oxidative stress markers
 Age synchronized worms (gravid stage) were exposed to different concentrations of CYP (0, 1, 5 and 15 mM)) in 1 ml K-medium in 12-well tissues culture plate and incubated for 4 h at 20 /C176 C. After the exposure period, the worms were washed three times with Kmedium, and the worm pellet was homogenized for fixed time in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4). The worm homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was used for the various assays as described below.
 ## 2.7.1. Assay of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
 The levels of reactive oxygen species generated in the worms were determined by DCFH oxidation method by Keston and Brandt
 . C. elegans homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min, the supernatant incubated with 5 l M DCFH-DA in final volume of 2 ml Tris-HCl for 45 min at room temperature. The intensity of florescence was measured at 530 nm following excitation at 485 nm. The amount of DCF (resulting from the ROS mediated oxidation of DCFH, which is produced by hydrolytic cleavage of DCFH-DA by cellular esterases) is determined using the DCF standard graph. Results were expressed as nmol of DCF/mg protein.
 ## 2.7.2. Measurement of H2O2
 Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) levels were measured by the method of Wolff . The worm homogenate was centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 10 min. Briefly, 0.1 ml of the worm supernatant was added to 900 l l of FOX1 reagent (100 l M xylenol orange, 100 mM sorbitol, 250 l M ammonium ferrous sulfate and 25 mM H2SO4), vortexed and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The sample was then centrifuged at low speed for 3 min and the absorbance of the supernatant was read at 560 nm against reagent blank. The enzyme activity was calculated based on molar extinction coefficient at 2.24 /C2 10 /C0 5 M /C0 1 CM /C0 1 . Results were expressed as nmol H2O2 generation/mg protein.
 ## 2.7.3. Reduced glutathione (GSH)
 Glutathione levels in C. elegans homogenate were quantified by the method of Benke et al. . Worms after exposure were washed thrice with K-medium and then homogenized in 5% TCA containing 1 mM EDTA solution in micro-centrifuge tubes using a micro-pestle followed by centrifugation at 3000 rpm. Two hundred microliters of the supernatant was added to 4.75 ml of sodium phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 8.0) with 1 mM EDTA to which 50 l l of DTNB (in phosphate buffer, 0.1 M, pH 7.0) was added and mixed. The absorbance of the solution was read at 412 nm. Results were expressed as l g GSH/mg protein.
 ## 2.7.4. Protein carbonyl levels
 The protein carbonyl levels were measured by the method of Levine et al. . After incubation, the assay mixture was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 /C176 C and 0.2 ml of the supernatant was precipitated with an equal volume of 20% TCA and then centrifuged. The pellet was re-suspended in 1 ml of 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (10 mM, in 2 M HCl) and allowed to stand at room temperature for 60 min with occasional vortexing. Proteins were then precipitated by adding 0.5 ml of 20% TCA. The resulting mixture was centrifuged and the pellet obtained was washed three times with 1 ml acetone. One milliliter of 2% SDS (in 20 mM TrisHCl, 0.14 M NaCl, pH 7.4) was added to the pellet and incubated overnight at 37 /C176 C. The absorbance of the solution was read at 360 nm and the carbonyl content was calculated using a molar extinction coefficient of 22,000 M /C0 1 cm /C0 1 . Results were expressed as nmol carbonyl/mg protein.
 ## 2.7.5. Superoxide dismutase (SOD)
 SOD activity was measured by a method on inhibition of autooxidation of quercetin by the enzyme at pH 10 . Auto-oxidation of quercetin was followed by measuring decrease in absorbance at 406 nm. The reaction mixture contained: 0.016 M phosphate buffer, 0.8 mM N , N , N 0 , N 0 -tetramethylethylenediamine and 0.08 mM EDTA in a total volume of 3.0 ml. The reaction was started by addition of 0.1 ml of quercetin solution (1.5 mg/10 ml). For the assay of SOD, suitable aliquot of supernatant was incorporated in the assay mixture in a final volume of 3.0 ml, and inhibition of quercetin auto-oxidation was monitored. The results are expressed as U/mg protein. One unit of enzyme is defined as the amount of enzyme that inhibits quercetin auto-oxidation by 50%.
 ## 2.7.6. Catalase (CAT)
 Catalase activity was measured by the method of Beers and Sizer . Briefly, supernatant derived from worms after exposure equivalent to 250 l g protein along with 25 l l of H2O2 (3%) was added to 3 ml phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4) and the decrease in absorbance due to H2O2 degradation was monitored at 240 nm for 5 min. The enzyme activity was calculated based on molar extinction coefficient at 43.6 M /C0 1 cm /C0 1 and the results were expressed as l mol of H2O2 consumed/min/mg protein.
 ## 2.7.7. Glutathione peroxidase (GPx)
 Glutathione peroxidase was measured according to the method of Flohe and Gunzler . The supernatant derived from worms after exposure equivalent to 100 l g protein was incubated with 0.575 ml phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 7.0, containing 0.5 mM EDTA). One hundred microliters of glutathione reductase (2.5 units/ml), 100 l l of GSH (10 mM) and 100 l l of NADPH (1% in sodium bicarbonate solution) at 37 /C176 C for 10 min. Finally, 100 l l of 12 mM t -butylhydroperoxide was added to the above mixture and the oxidation of NADPH over 5 min was recorded at 340 nm. Results were expressed as nmol of NADPH oxidized/min/mg protein.
 ## 2.7.8. Glutathione reductase (GR)
 The reaction was started by adding 100 l l homogenate to the reaction mixture (final volume 1 ml) containing 0.2 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) of 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM oxidized glutathione (GSSG) and 0.2 mM NADPH. The enzyme activity was measured indirectly by monitoring the oxidation of NADPH following decrease in OD/min for a minimum of 3 min at 340 nm. One unit enzyme activity was defined as nmol of NADPH consumed/min/ mg protein based on molar extinction coefficient .
 ## 2.7.9. Glutathione-S-transferase (GST)
 Potassium phosphate buffer (0.5 ml, 0.2 M, pH 7.2) were added 0.1 ml of GSH (10 mM), 0.01 ml of 1-chloro-2,4-dinitro benzene (CDNB, 0.1 M) and 390 l l of distilled water and mixed. Supernatant derived from worms after exposure equivalent to 100 l g protein was then added to the above mixture and the formation of the adduct of CDNB ( S -2,4-dinitrophenyl glutathione) was monitored by measuring net increase in absorbance at 340 nm. The enzyme activity was calculated based on absorption coefficient of 9 mM /C0 1 cm /C0 1 . Results were expressed as l mol of adduct formed/ min/mg protein .
 ## 2.8. Protein estimation
 Ten microliters of homogenate was added to 490 l l of distilled water and incubated with 2.5 ml alkaline copper sulfate solution for 10 min at room temperature. Two hundred and fifty microliters of Folin's reagent (1:1 diluted with water) was added to the mixture, mixed well and the color was read after 30 min at 670 nm. BSA was used as the standard .
 ## 2.9. Statistical analysis
 Data were expressed as means ± SE. Statistical significance was assessed either by Student's t -test ( P &lt; 0.001) or by ANOVA and post hoc Duncan's Multiple Range Test (DMRT) ( P &lt; 0.05) using SPSS 10.05 FOR Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA).
 ## 3. Results
 ## 3.1. Effect of CYP on egg laying in C. elegans
 Worms exposed to CYP exhibited significant reduction in the egg laying, in a concentration-dependent manner (Table 1). The average number of eggs laid per worm in control group was 3.0 ± 0.04/h while that in worms exposed to the highest concentration of CYP (15 mM) was 1.0/h. The percent decrease in egg laying was 55%, 64% and 67% at 1, 5 and 15 mM cypermethrin, respectively.
 ## 3.2. Brood size
 Exposing C. elegans to graded doses of cypermethrin caused significant decrease in mean progeny (brood size) per worm (286 ± 4 in control vs 233 ± 3, 172 ± 3 and 133 ± 5 at 1, 5 and 15 mM), respectively. Percent decrease in brood size over control was 18%, 40% and 53% at the above mentioned concentrations of CYP, respectively (Fig. 1).
 ## 3.3. Feeding inhibition
 There was a gradual, time-related decrease in bacterial density in control worm suspension indicating normal feeding by these worms. CYP at all the tested concentrations induced significant decrease in feeding in C. elegans after 4 h of exposure. The extent of feeding inhibition after 4 h in worms exposed to CYP was -1 mM, 29%; 5 mM, 41%; 58%, 15 mM (Fig. 2). However, even after 4 h of exposure, the worms showed no cessation in feeding.
 ## 3.4. Lifespan
 Cypermethrin decreased the life span in C. elegans in a dosedependent manner compared to control (Fig. 3). The untreated worms survived till for 25 days while the CYP treated worms survived for 23, 22, 20 days at 1, 5 and 15 mM, respectively.
 ## 3.5. Effect of cypermethrin on oxidative balance
 Fig. 4 shows the effect of CYP on reactive oxygen species generation in worms after 4 h exposure period. The worms revealed an increase in ROS in a dose-dependent manner (21%, 32% and 56% increase at 1, 5 and 15 mM, respectively). The effects of CYP on intracellular hydrogen peroxide levels in the worms under various concentrations are depicted in Fig. 5. There was a significant and a dose-dependent increase of 17%, 50% and 62% in hydrogen peroxide levels at 1, 5 and 15 mM of CYP, respectively. CYP induced oxidative stress resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in the levels of reduced glutathione in the CYP exposed worms (Fig. 6). Concomitantly, as shown in Fig. 7, CYP also increased protein carbonyl levels a dose-dependent manner (8%, 17% and 29% at 1, 5 and 15 mM, respectively) (Fig. 7).
 Table 1 Inhibition of egg laying in C. elegans on exposure to cypermethrin.
 |   Cypermethrin (mM) | Mean eggs/worm *   | |---------------------|--------------------| |                   0 | 3.0 ± 0.041 a      | |                   1 | 1.4 ± 0.036 b      | |                   5 | 1.1 ± 0.028 b,c    | |                  15 | 1.0 ± 0.026 b,c    |
 Data analyzed by post-hoc test (Duncan); Means in the same column with different superscript differ significantly ( P &lt; 0.05).
 * Eggs laid by a single worm after 1 h of exposure to cypermethrin ( n = 120).
 
 Fig. 1. Effect of cypermethrin (CYP) treatment on brood size in C. elegans . Each data point is means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 Fig. 2. Effect of cypermethrin (CYP) on feeding in Caenorhabditis elegans. Worms were suspended in K-medium with bacterial density adjusted to 1.0 OD (at 550 nm) initially. Feeding was monitored by decrease in OD at different time intervals. Each data point is means ± SEM of three replicates from three independent experiments.
 
 Fig. 3. Shortened lifespan of C. elegans resulting from exposure to cypermethrin (CYP). Lifespan of worms was determined by counting the live worms in the absence (control) or presence of varying concentrations of CYP on different days.
 
 The effect of CYP on antioxidants enzymes in C. elegans after 4 h exposure is presented in Figs. 8-11. SOD activity was significantly decreased (21%) at the highest concentration of CYP (15 mM) (Fig. 8) while an increase in the activity of CAT at 15 mM (45%)
 
 Fig. 4. Reactive oxygen species levels in C. elegans exposed to cypermethrin (CYP). All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 Fig. 5. Hydrogen peroxide levels in C. elegans exposed to cypermethrin (CYP). All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 
 Fig. 6. Glutathione levels in C. elegans exposed to cypermethrin (CYP). All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 
 was evident (Fig. 9). In C. elegans , the activity of GPx is reported to be less and our study showed a significant decrease in GPx activity on exposure to CYP (1 mM, 10%; 5 mM, 20%; 15 mM, 27%) and an increase in the GR activity in C. elegans exposed to CYP was evident which was marked only at 15 mM (25%) (Fig. 10). The activity of glutathioneS -transferase showed a significant and dose-dependent increase at all tested concentrations (1 mM, 14%; 5 mM, 32%; 15 mM, 38%) (Fig. 11).
 
 Fig. 7. The effect of cypermethrin (CYP) treatment on protein carbonyls levels in C. elegans . All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 Fig. 8. Superoxide dismutase activities in C. elegans exposed to cypermethrin (CYP). All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 
 Fig. 9. Catalase activities in C. elegans exposed to cypermethrin (CYP). All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 
 ## 4. Discussion
 The results of the present study provides evidences to show that although CYP at the tested concentrations did not induce any symptoms of toxicity or mortality in C. elegans , it elicited toxicity by affecting physiological parameters viz., egg laying, brood size, feeding rate, life span and also induced oxidative stress in worms
 Fig. 10. Glutathione peroxidase and glutathione reductase activities in C. elegans exposed to cypermethrin (CYP). All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 
 Fig. 11. GlutathioneS -transferase activity in C. elegans exposed to cypermethrin (CYP). All values are means ± SEM ( n = 9). Groups with different letters are significantly different (ANOVA, post hoc, Duncan SPSS 10.05, P &lt; 0.05).
 
 by increasing free radicals, decreasing reduced glutathione levels, increasing protein carbonyl levels and altering the activities of antioxidant enzymes at all tested concentrations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the second report on the toxicity of CYP in C. elegans . Earlier we had reported CYP toxicity and its amelioration by a -tocopherol supplementation in C. elegans .
 The primary action of CYP is on the nervous system of vertebrates and invertebrates by induction of repetitive activity and production of nerve impulses as a result of alteration in permeability of nerve membrane . Further, CYP being a lipophilic compound can penetrate into the lipid bilayer of tissues, disturbing the phospholipid orientation thus causing changes in the fluidity of the membrane . Cleavage of CYP releases cyanohydrins, which are unstable under physiological conditions. These cyanohydrins decompose to cyanides and aldehydes, which produce free radicals and cause oxidative stress . The overall results of the present study showed that exposure of C. elegans to CYP resulted in significant oxidative stress in the worms. Increased levels of ROS/H2O2 and protein carbonyl content associated with reduced level of GSH and alteration in antioxidant enzymes clearly demonstrated the oxidative insult.
 GSH is also an important intracellular molecule that protects cells against endogenous and exogenous OS . Depletion of GSH by oxidants may alter the redox status of the cell and present a stressful and toxic situation since GSH plays a critical role in maintaining cellular redox homeostasis. Oxidative stress (OS) is also known to damage proteins by the introduction of carbonyl groups. Hence the significant depletion of GSH and marked elevation in protein carbonyl content in the worms exposed to CYP clearly suggest oxidative stress.
 Various organisms can respond to oxidative stress by increasing their antioxidant enzyme activities. In the present study, exposure to CYP resulted in decrease in the activities of SOD and GPx and increase in the activities of CAT, GR and GST. For C. elegans , there is some information on transcription factors involved in up-regulating antioxidant enzymes (SOD and GST) in response to oxidants  however, the mechanism of catalase regulation is not known. Catalase detoxifies the ROS/H2O2 and therefore it acts as an antioxidant enzyme  and it is inducible by OS in C. elegans as well as in mammals .
 GPx is involved in protecting cytosol and plasma membrane from lipid peroxidation (LPO) . In fact, this enzyme transforms lipid hydroperoxides produced at the membrane level into less reactive species. The presence of GPx has not been earlier demonstrated in C. elegans . However, we could conveniently assay the activity of GPx in the worms, although the basal activity was comparatively low. Our data are in accordance with reports in rats wherein reduced activity of GPx was observed in CYP exposed rats . The lower enzymatic activity of GPx in our study could indicate facilitation of increased LPO due to the lack of the protective effect of this antioxidant enzyme. GST is an enzyme that participates in the detoxification process facilitating the conjugation reactions between GSH and xenobiotics . Hence GST plays a critical role in protection against electrophiles and products of oxidative stress . In the present study, concomitant with the decrease in GSH levels due to CYP exposure, the activity of GST increased further corroborating the oxidative insult of CYP.
 There is ample correlative evidence that indirectly supports the oxidative damage theory and aging such as observed increased with increasing age of molecular damage and ROS production and correlations among animal species between life span and ROS production rates . It has also been shown that treatments that increase oxidative stress promote molecular damage and reduce life span . In the present study, we have shown that treatment of C. elegans with CYP decreased the life span marginally which correlated well with the extent of oxidative stress induced by CYP in these worms.
 In the present study, feeding rate was significantly decreased following exposure to CYP. Feeding effect could be observed by microscopy as a shut down of the pumping action of pharynx. The rate of nematode feeding could be quantified by measuring the rate of reduction of the optical density (at 550 nm) of the bacterial suspension. On addition of a toxicant, the rate of reduction of the optical density was markedly reduced, as a consequence of feeding inhibition . A physiological mechanism that inhibits feeding may be essential for survival when animals are exposed to severe chemical stress. Such a mechanism would serve both to limit the intake of toxins/toxicant. Thus feeding inhibition also has implications for toxicological studies in C. elegans since it imposes a limit on the concentration of toxicant that can be ingested.
 The fitness of an organism is determined by its success in reproduction . In the present study worms exposed to CYP showed decreased egg laying and decreased brood size compared to the controls. In contrast to the lack of lethality of CYP treatment in adult worms, non-lethal concentrations of CYP reduced the brood size of C. elegans and reduced the fertility suggesting the potential genotoxic effects of CYP to the germ cells of the worms. The genotoxicity of CYP has been well demonstrated in D. melanogaster  and mouse .
 Egg laying in C. elegans serves as an excellent behavioral parameter, since it has been extensively characterized. It can be effectively quantitated and more importantly, it has a simple
 anatomical basis. Eggs are laid when the two hermaphrodite-specific neurons (HSNs) stimulate the contraction of 16 egg-laying muscle cells to push eggs through the uterus and out the vulva . In the present study, we have not investigated in detail the specific effect of cypermethrin on HSNs. We attribute this effect of CYP to its ability to alter nerve function. Cypermethrin has been earlier shown to stimulate reproductive physiology in the freshwater snail Lymnaea acuminata resulting in increased egg masses by altering the hormonal levels . However, although CYP significantly increased fecundity in that study, it equally reduced survivability of hatchlings in the snails.
 Reductions in egg laying concomitant with decreases in food consumption has been reported in birds exposed to dietary methamidophos, an organophosphorus insecticide . To the best of our knowledge, similar effects have not been reported in animals exposed to CYP. In the present study, we observed reduced egg laying/brood size concomitant with reduced feeding in worms exposed to CYP. However, whether these parameters are interdependent in C. elegans is not clear.
 ## 5. Conclusions
 In conclusion, we have shown that CYP induces oxidative stress in C. elegans . We have also demonstrated that at non-lethal concentrations, cypermethrin also induces subtle physiological alterations, which may or may not be the consequence of oxidative stress induced therein, which can largely impair the normal functioning and survival of the worms. However, further studies are warranted to correlate the observed biochemical and physiological responses elicited by cypermethrin.
 ## Acknowledgments
 The authors thank the Director, Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore for his keen interest in the study. C. elegans (N2) wild-type strain used in this study was kindly provided by the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center, MN, USA, which is funded by the NIH National Center for Research Resources. M/s Hyderabad Chemicals Ltd., Hyderabad, India, is thankfully acknowledged for providing the technical grade Cypermethrin. The first author (S.S.) was supported by Rajeev Gandhi National Research Fellowship (UGC).
 ## References
 -  ATSDR, Toxicological Profile of Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids, Agency for Toxic Substances and Diseases Registry (ATSDR), US Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA, 2003.
-  M. Elliott, N.F. Janes, Synthetic pyrethroids - a new class of insecticide, Chem. Soc. Rev. 7  473-505.
-  D.M. Soderland, J.R. Bloomquist, Neurotoxic action of pyrethroids insecticides, Ann. Rev. Entomol. 34  77-96.
-  T. Narahashi, Neuroreceptor and ion channels as the basis for drug action: past, present, future, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 294  1-26.
-  M. Elliott, in: M. Elliot (Ed.), Synthetic Pyrethroids, ACS Symposium Series No. 42, American Chemical Society, Washington DC, 1977, pp. 229-232.
-  I. Kakko, T. Toimela, H. Tahti, The synaptosomal membrane bound ATPase as a target for the neurotoxic effects of pyrethroids, permethrin and cypermethrin, Chemosphere 51  475-480.
-  M. Kale, N. Rathore, S. John, D. Bhatnagar, S.S. Nayyar, V. Kothari, Lipid peroxidative damage on pyrethroid exposure and alteration in antioxidant status in rat erythrocytes: a possible involvement of reactive oxygen species, Toxicol. Lett. 102  197-205.
-  B. Giray, A. Gurbay, F. Hincal, Cypermethrin induced oxidative stress in rat brain and liver is prevented vitamin E or allopurinol, Toxicol. Lett. 118  139-146.
-  F.M. El-Demerdash, M.I. Yousef, K.S. Al-Salhen, Protective effects of isoflavone on some biomedical parameters affected by cypermethrin in male rabbits, J. Environ. Sci. Health B38  365-378.
-  P. Grajeda-Cota, M.V. Ramirez-Mares, E.G. de Mejia, Vitamin C protects against in vitro cytotoxicity of cypermethin in rat hepatocytes, Toxicol. In vitro 18  13-19.
-  K. Prasanthi, K. Muralidhara, P.S. Rajini, Fenvalerate-induced oxidative damage in rat tissues and its attenuation by dietary sesame oil, Food Chem. Toxicol. 43  299-306.
-  G.T. Ankley, R.D. Johnson, N.E. Detenbeck, S.P. Bradbury, Developmental of research strategy for assessing the ecological risk of endocrine disruptors, Rev. Toxicol. 1  1-106.
-  I. Mukhopadhyay, D.K. Chowdhuri, M. Bajpai, A. Dhawan, Evaluation of in vivo genotoxicity of cypermethrin in Drosophila melanogaster using the alkaline comet assay, Mutagenesis 19  85-90.
-  A. Kumar, B. Sharma, R.S. Pandey, Preliminary evaluation of the acute toxicity of cypermethrin and k -cyhalothrin to channa punctatus , Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 79  613-616.
-  S. Patel, A.L. Pandey, M. Bajpayee, D. Parmer, A. Dhawan, Cypermethrin induced DNA damage in organs and tissues of the mouse: evidence from the comet assays, Mutat. Res. 607  176-183.
-  M.P.W. Festing, V. Baumans, D.R. Combas, M. Halder, F.M. Hendriksen, B.P. Howard, D.P. Lovell, G.I. Moore, P. Overend, M.S. Wilson, Reducing the use of laboratory animals in biomedical research: problems and possible solution, Altern. Lab. Anim. 26  283-301.
-  I.A. Hope, Background on Caenorhabditis elegans , in: C. elegans : A Practical Approach, Oxford University Press, NY, 1999, pp. 1-15.
-  C.L. Peredney, P.L. Williams, Utility of Caenorhabditis elegans for assessing heavy metal contamination in artificial soil, Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 39  113-118.
-  W.A. Boyd, P.L. Williams, Comparison of the sensitivity of three nematode species to copper and their utility in aquatic and soil toxicity tests, Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 22  2768-2774.
-  G.S. Donkin, P.L. Williams, Influence of developmental stage, salts and food presence on various end points using Caenorhabditis elegans for aquatic toxicity testing, Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 14  2139-2147.
-  G.L. Anderson, W.A. Boyd, P.L. Williams, Assessment of sublethal endpoints for toxicity testing with the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 20  833-838.
-  P.S. Rajini, P. Melstrom, P.L. Williams, A comparative study on the relationship between various toxicological endpoints in Caenorhabditis elegans exposed to organophosphorus insecticides, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A 71  10431050.
-  Y. Honda, S. Honda, Oxidative stress and lifespan determination in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 949  466-474.
-  K.B. Jadhav, P.R. Rajini, Evaluation of sublethal effects of dichlorvos upon Caenorhabditis elegans based on the set of end points of toxicity, J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol. 22  19-24.
-  Z. Wu, J.V. Smith, V. Paramashivam, P. Butko, I. Khan, J.R. Cypser, Y. Luo, Ginko biloba extract EGb 761 increases and extends life span of Caenorhabditis elegans , Cell. Mol. Biol. 48 (6)  725-731.
-  P. Hartman, E. Childress, T. Beyer, Nematode development is inhibited by methyl viologen and high oxygen concentration at a rate inversely proportional to lifespan, J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 50  B322-B326.
-  J.R. Vanfleteren, Oxidative stress and ageing in Caenorhabditis elegans , Biochem. J. 292  605-608.
-  S. Brenner, The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans , Genetics 77  71-94.
-  J. Sultson, J. Hodggkin, Methods, in: W.B. Wood (Ed.), The Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York, 1988, pp. 587-606.
-  P.L. Williams, D.B. Dusenbery, Aquatic toxicity testing using the nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans , Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 9  1285-1290.
-  A. Bany, M. Dong, M.R. Koelle, Genetic and cellular basis for acetylcholine inhibition of Caenorhabditis elegans egg-laying behavior, J. Neurosci. 23 (22)  8060-8069.
-  P.L. Middendorf, D. Dusenbery, Fluoroacetic acid is a potent and specific inhibitor of reproduction in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , J. Nematol. 25  573-577.
-  D. Jones, E.P. Candido, Feeding is inhibited by sublethal concentrations of toxicants and by heat stress in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans : relationship to the cellular stress response, J. Exp. Zool. 284  147-157.
-  M. Keaney, F. Matthijssens, M. Sharpe, J. Vanfleteren, D. Gems, Superoxide dismutase mimetics elevates superoxide dismutase activity in vivo but donot retard ageing in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 37  239-250.
-  A.S. Keston, R. Brandt, The fluorometric analysis of ultramicroquantities of hydrogen peroxide, Anal. Biochem. 11  1-5.
-  S.P. Wolff, Ferrous ion oxidation in presence of ferric ion indicator xylenol orange for measurement of hydroperoxides, Methods Enzymol. 233  182-189.
-  G.M. Benke, K.L. Cheever, F.E. Mirrer, S.D. Murphy, Comparative toxicity, anticholinesterase action and metabolism of methyl parathion and parathion in sunfish and mice, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 28  97-109.
-  R.L. Levine, D. Garland, C.N. Oliver, A. Amici, I. Climent, A.G. Lenz, Determination of carbonyl content in oxidatively modified proteins, Methods Enzymol. 186  464-478.
-  V.A. Kostyuk, A.I. Potapovich, Superoxide-driven oxidation of quercetin and a simple sensitive assay for determination of superoxide dismutase, Biochem. Int. 19 (5)  1117-1124.
-  R.F. Beers, I.W. Sizer, A spectrophotometric method for measuring the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide by catalase, J. Biol. Chem. 195  133140.
 -  L. Flohe, W.A. Gunzler, Assays of glutathione peroxidase, Methods Enzymol. 105  114-121.
-  I. Cariberg, B. Manervik, Purification and characterization of the flavoenzyme glutathione reductase from rat liver, J. Biol. Chem. 250  5475-5480.
-  W.B. Jakoby, W.H. Habig, in: W.B. Jakoby (Ed.), Enzymatic Basis of Detoxication, vol. 2, Academic Press, New York, 1980, pp. 63-94.
-  O.H. Lowry, N.J. Rosenbrough, L. Farra, R.J. Randall, Protein measurement with folin phenol reagent, J. Biol. Chem. 193  265-275.
-  S. Shashikumar, P.S. Rajini, Cypermethrin induced toxicity and oxidative stress in Caenorhabdtis elegans and its alleviation by a -tocopherol. Paper presented at the International Conference on ''Free Radicals &amp; Natural Products in Health'  and '7th Annual Meeting of the Society of Free Radical Research-India', Lucknow, India, March 19-21, 2009.
-  L. Vaalavitra, H. Tahti, Astrocyte membrane Na+, K(+)-ATPase and Mg(2+)ATPase as targets of organic solvent impact, Life Sci. 57  2223-2230.
-  B.A. Freeman, T.D. Crapo, Biology of diseases: free radicals and tissues injury, Lab. Invest. 47  412-426.
-  W.N. Tawe, M. Eschbach, R.D. Walter, K. Henkle-Duhrsen, Identification of stress-responsive gene in Caenorhabditis elegans using RT-PCR different display, Nucleic Acid Res. 26  1621-1627.
-  Y. Honda, S. Honda, The daf-2 gene network for longevity regulates oxidative stress resistance and Mn-superoxide dismutase gene expression Caenorhabditis elegans , FASEB J. 13  1385-1393.
-  J.M. Mates, Effects of antioxidants enzyme in molecular control of reactive oxygen species toxicology, Toxicology 153  83-104.
-  C.T. Murphy, S.A. McCarroll, C.I. Bargman, A. Fraser, R.S. Kamath, Genes that act downstream of DAF-16 to influence the life span of Caenorhabditis elegans , Nature 424  277-283.
-  E. Rohrdanz, R. Kahl, Alterations of antioxidant enzyme expression in response to hydrogen peroxide, Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 24  27-38.
-  B. Halliwell, J.M.C. Gutteridge, Free Radical in Biology and Medicine, Oxford University Press, New York, 1989. pp. 18-276.
-  D. Bagchi, M. Bagchi, E.A. Hassoun, S.J. Stohs, In vitro and in vivo generation of reactive oxygen species, DNA damage and lactate dehydrogenase leakage by selected pesticide, Toxicology 104  120-140.
-  G.J. Mulder, A.E.P. Adang, J. Brussee, B. Ketterer, D. Meyer, A. van de Gen, The Glutathione Binding Site of Glutathione s-transferase Isoenzyme from the Rat: Selectively towards Tripeptide Analogues of Glutathione. Glutathione stransferase and Drug Resistance, Taylor and Francis, Great Britain, 1990. p. 75.
-  J.D. Hayes, D.J. Pulford, The glutathione s-transferase super-gene family: regulation of GST and the contribution of the iso-enzymes to cancer chemoprotection and drug resistance, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 30  445-600.
-  P.K. Tripathi, A. Singh, Toxic effects of cypermethrin and alphamethrin on reproduction and oxidative metabolism of the fresh water snail, Lymnaea acuminate , Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safe. 58  227-235.
-  R.S. Sohal, R.J. Mockett, W.C. Orr, Current issues the role of oxidative stress in aging in: a perspective, Cell Differ. 29  45-66.
-  H. Adachi, Y. Fujiwara, N. Ishii, Effects of oxygen on protein carbonyl and ageing in Caenorhabditis elegans mutants with long ( age-1 ) and short ( mev-1 ) lifespan, J. Gerontol. 53A  B240-B244.
-  P. Woin, C. Bronmark, Effects of DDT and MCPA (4-chloro-2methylphenoxyacetic acid) on reproduction of the pond snail, Lymnaea stagnalis L., Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 48  7-13.
-  C. Desai, G. Garriga, S. Mclntire, H.R. Horvitz, A genetic pathway for the development of the Caenorhabditis elegans HSN motor neurons, Nature 336  638-646.
-  K.L. Stromborg, Reproduction of bobwhites fed different dietary concentrations of an organophosphate insecticide, methamidophos, Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 15  143-147.