Received: 22 June 2014,
 Revised: 8 September 2014,
 (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI 10.1002/jat.3079
 ## Successful validation of genomic biomarkers for human immunotoxicity in Jurkat T cells in vitro
 Peter C. J. Schmeits a,b , Jia Shao a,b , Danique A. van der Krieken a , Oscar L. Volger a , Henk van Loveren b,c , Ad. A. C. M. Peijnenburg a * and Peter J. M. Hendriksen a
 ABSTRACT: Previously, we identi /uniFB01 ed 25 classi /uniFB01 er genes that were able to assess immunotoxicity using human Jurkat T cells. The present study aimed to validate these classi /uniFB01 ers. For that purpose, Jurkat cells were exposed for 6 h to subcytotoxic doses of nine immunotoxicants, /uniFB01 ve non-immunotoxicants and four compounds for which human immunotoxicity has not yet been fully established. RNA was isolated and subjected to Fluidigm quantitative real time (qRT) -PCR analysis. The sensitivity, speci /uniFB01 city and accuracy of the screening assay as based on the nine immunotoxicants and /uniFB01 ve non-immunotoxicants used in this study were 100%, 80% and 93%, respectively, which is better than the performance in our previous study. Only one compound was classi /uniFB01 ed as false positive (benzo-e-pyrene). Of the four potential (non-)immunotoxicants, chlorantraniliprole and Hidrasec were classi /uniFB01 ed immunotoxic and Sunset yellow and imidacloprid as non-immunotoxic. ToxPi analysis of the PCR data provided insight in the molecular pathways that were affected by the compounds. The immunotoxicants 2,3dichloro-propanol and cypermethrin, although structurally different, affected protein metabolism and cholesterol biosynthesis and transport. In addition, four compounds, i.e. chlorpyrifos, aldicarb, benzo-e-pyrene and anti-CD3, affected genes in cholesterol metabolism and transport, protein metabolism and transcription regulation. qRT -PCR on eight additional genes coding for similar processes as de /uniFB01 ned in ToxPi analyzes, supported these results. In conclusion, the 25 immunotoxic classi/uniFB01 ers performed very well in a screening with new non-immunotoxic and immunotoxic compounds. Therefore, the Jurkat screening assay has great promise to be applied within a tiered approach for animal free testing of human immunotoxicity. Copyright © 2014 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
 Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ' s web-site.
 Keywords: immunotoxicity; Fluidigm; biomarker; classi /uniFB01 er; genomic; qRT-PCR; ToxPi; prediction; Jurkat; high throughput
 ## Introduction
 Direct immunotoxicity is de /uniFB01 ned as the action of a compound on components of the immune system that lead to either immunostimulation or immunosuppression. The assessment of direct immunotoxicity is an important part of the overall toxicological investigation of chemicals . Several authorities including the European Medicines Agency  and the US Food and Drug Administration  emphasize the need to evaluate immunotoxic effects during the preclinical phase of drug development. Other authorities such as the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)  and the Environmental Protection Agency  stress the need for safety assessment of food contaminants and environmental pollutants. Current immunotoxicity screening still focuses on rodent in vivo models. Since the implementation of REACH, that requires the evaluation of chemical hazards for chemicals of which the yearly production exceeds 1 tonne, progress has been made towards development of in vitro alternatives for immunotoxicity testing .
 In our previous work, using the in vitro Jurkat T cell model, we identi /uniFB01 ed and validated 25 biomarker genes representative for different mechanisms underlying direct immunotoxicity  (Table 1). Jurkat T cells were chosen as they are easy to work with, cheap, readily available and of human origin, making extrapolation to human hazard easier than an animal cell model. Jurkat cells have also been applied in assessing the effect of compounds on mitogen-induced proliferation and migration .
 On the basis of the outcome of the previous study, two important questions were raised. First, how does the screening system perform towards new classes of immunotoxicants that have not been tested yet? This question is relevant because the biomarkers are based on a set of chemicals belonging to a variety of compound classes such as metals, mycotoxins, herbicides,
 * Correspondence to: A. A. C. M. Peijnenburg, RIKILT Institute of Food Safety, Wageningen University and Research Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands. Email: ad.peijnenburg@wur.nl
 a RIKILT Institute of Food Safety, Wageningen University and Research Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands
 b Department of Toxicogenomics, Maastricht University, the Netherlands
 c Centre for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands
 Accepted: 10 September 2014
 
 Published online in Wiley Online Library: 25 November 2014
 
 Table 1. Overview of 28 primers that were used as classi /uniFB01 ers of immunotoxicity. The last three primers (italics) were used as reference genes
 | Gene Symbol   | Description                                                                                 | mRNA accession   | Taqman assay   | |---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------| | ABCA1         | ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A (ABC1), member 1                                         | NM_005502        | Hs01059118_m1  | | ABCG1         | ATP-binding cassette, sub-family G (WHITE), member 1                                        | NM_004915        | Hs00245154_m1  | | AK4           | adenylate kinase 4                                                                          | NM_001005353     | Hs03405743_g1  | | ALDH8A1       | aldehyde dehydrogenase 8 family, member A1                                                  | NM_001193480     | Hs00988965_m1  | | ARRDC3        | arrestin domain containing 3                                                                | NM_020801        | Hs00385845_m1  | | BZRAP1        | benzodiazapine receptor (peripheral) associated protein 1                                   | NM_004758        | Hs00270490_m1  | | CCNG2         | cyclin G2                                                                                   | NM_004354        | Hs00171119_m1  | | CEBPB         | CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), beta                                                | NM_005194        | Hs00270923_s1  | | CHAC1         | ChaC, cation transport regulator homolog 1 ( E. coli )                                      | NM_001142776     | Hs00225520_m1  | | CRIM1         | cysteine rich transmembrane BMP regulator 1 (chordin-like)                                  | NM_016441        | Hs00212750_m1  | | FBXO32        | F-box protein 32                                                                            | NM_001242463     | Hs01041408_m1  | | GPR18         | G protein-coupled receptor 18                                                               | NM_001098200     | Hs00245542_m1  | | HMGCS1        | 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1 (soluble)                                         | NM_001098272     | Hs00940429_m1  | | HSPA1B        | heat shock 70kDa protein 1B                                                                 | NM_005346        | Hs01040501-sH  | | HSPA5         | heat shock 70kDa protein 5 (glucose-regulated protein, 78kDa)                               | NM_005347        | Hs00946084_g1  | | ID1           | inhibitor of DNA binding 1, dominant negative helix-loop-helix protein                      | NM_002165        | Hs00357821_g1  | | ID2           | inhibitor of DNA binding 2, dominant negative helix-loop-helix protein                      | NM_002166        | Hs00747379_m1  | | KLF2          | Kruppel-like factor 2 (lung)                                                                | NM_016270        | Hs00360439_g1  | | KLHL24        | kelch-like 24 (Drosophila)                                                                  | NM_017644        | Hs00214210_m1  | | NQO1          | NAD(P)H dehydrogenase, quinone 1                                                            | NM_000903        | Hs01045995_m1  | | SLC7A11       | solute carrier family 7 (anionic amino acid transporter light chain, xc- system), member 11 | NM_014331        | Hs00921938_m1  | | SRXN1         | sul /uniFB01 redoxin 1                                                                      | NM_080725        | Hs00607800_m1  | | TM6SF1        | transmembrane 6 superfamily member 1                                                        | NM_001144903     | Hs00224823_m1  | | VLDLR         | very low density lipoprotein receptor                                                       | NM_001018056     | Hs01047538_m1  | | VPREB1        | pre-B lymphocyte 1                                                                          | NM_007128        | Hs00356766_g1  | | B2M           | β 2 microglobulin, present on all nucleated cells                                           | NM_004048        | H2000984230_m1 | | GET4          | Golgi To ER Traf /uniFB01 c Protein 4 Homolog                                               | NM_015949.2      | Hs00944514_m1  | | PIGG          | Phosphatidylinositol Glycan Anchor Biosynthesis, Class G                                    | NM_017733.3      | Hs01107608_m1  |
 insecticides and fungicides. Therefore, how this biomarkerbased system will perform when exposed to a compound from a class that has not been tested should be further investigated. Second, only a limited number of non-immunotoxic compounds has been tested, which resulted in a less satisfactory speci /uniFB01 city. How will this screening system perform when more nonimmunotoxicants are included? To answer these important issues, new compounds were searched for in literature and reports.
 In total we selected nine known immunotoxicants, /uniFB01 ve known non-immunotoxicants and four compounds for which it was not fully established whether they are immunotoxic or not (Table 2). Known immunotoxicants from new compound classes include the chloropropanol food contaminant 2,3-dichloro-1-propanol (2,3-DCP) , the biological anti-CD3 , the organophosphorus pesticide chlorpyrifos which causes immunotoxicity in T cells and natural killer cells , the lectin phytohaemagglutinin (PHA-L)  and the poly-brominated /uniFB02 ame-retardant tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) . In addition, immunotoxic compounds from classes tested before were included: the insecticides cypermethrin and aldicarb , and the mycotoxin zearalenone .The insecticide aldicarb increased T cell populations in women drinking contaminated water , however, aldicarb was assessed to be non-immunotoxic in mice . Arsenic trioxide was already tested before in the Jurkat screening model and is tested again as a positive control as it showed the largest effects on the biomarker genes .
 As the results of compounds that have been tested as nonimmunotoxic are less likely to be published, a publication bias exists for non-immunotoxic compounds. Therefore, searches for non-immunotoxicants also concerned governmental reports such as those from the European CHemicals Agency (ECHA) and the Australian Pesticides and the Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA). Known non-immunotoxicants selected in this study were ametoctradin (APVMA), arsenobetaine , carbon tetrachloride (CCL4) , diuron  and benzo-e-pyrene .
 A third category contains compounds of which immunotoxicity has not been de /uniFB01 nitively observed. Four compounds were included: sunset yellow FCF, racecadotril (Hidrasec), chlorantraniliprole (trade name Rynaxypyr) and imidacloprid. Sunset yellow FCF is a food contaminant that was tested immunotoxic in mice . Sunset yellow FCF reduced the number of monocytes to 50% in mice in vivo without affecting other immune cells . Hidrasec, which is used as a treatment for diarrhoea, was assessed to be non-immunotoxic in rodents
 
 Table 2. Overview of the compounds, classes and concentrations used. Compounds ( n =18) were divided in immunotoxic ( n =9, top), non-immunotoxic ( n =5, middle) and unknowns ( n =4, bottom)
 | Compound name           | Class                                      | Concentration ( µ M) CV80   | Immunotoxicity   | |-------------------------|--------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------| | 2,3-dichloro-1-propanol | Food contaminant, chloropropanol           | 6000                        | Yes              | | Aldicarb                | Insecticide                                | 1000                        | Yes              | | Anti-CD3                | Biological                                 | 2.5 ng/ µ l                 | Yes              | | Arsenic trioxide        | Metal                                      | 3                           | Yes              | | Chlorpyrifos            | Organophosphorous pesticide                | 1000                        | Yes              | | Cypermethrin            | Insecticide                                | 1000                        | Yes              | | Phytohaemmagluttinin    | Lectin                                     | 100ng/ml                    | Yes              | | Tetrabromobisphenol A   | Flame retardant                            | 75                          | Yes              | | Zearalenone             | Fungal mycotoxin                           | 50                          | Yes              | | Ametoctradin            | Fungicide                                  | 25                          | No               | | Arsenobetaine           | Organoarsenic compound                     | 20                          | No               | | Benzo[e]pyrene          | Polyaromatic hydrocarbon                   | 250                         | No               | | Carbon tetrachloride    | Organic compound                           | 1000                        | No               | | Diuron                  | Herbicide                                  | 100                         | No               | | Chlorantraniliprole     | Insecticide                                | 100                         | ?                | | Imidacloprid            | Pesticide/insecticide, endocrine disrupter | 1000                        | ?                | | Hidrasec                | Antidiarrheal drug                         | 500                         | ?                | | Sunset yellow - FCF     | Food additive                              | 500                         | ?                |
 (Abbott Healthcare Products Limited, http://www.medicines.org.uk/ emc/print-document?documentId=27109 and www.mims.com. sg/Singapore/drug/info/Ferinject/?type=full). Although the information lea /uniFB02 et mentions that up to 1% of the users suffered from a rash and erythema, which are clinical signs of hypersensitivity of the human skin to chemicals. Also chlorantraniliprole was evaluated as non-immunotoxic in rodents (non-peer reviewed publications). However, chlorantraniliprole is suspected to act on the release of calcium from intracellular calcium stores  which is an important process in T cell activation. Therefore it was decided to include this drug in the present study as well. Imidacloprid is a neonicotinoid insecticide and has been tested immunotoxic in rats and mice . Nevertheless, there is little known about the effects of this compound on the human immune system and on human-derived immune cells in vitro .
 The aim of this study is twofold. The /uniFB01 rst aim is to validate the 25 biomarkers previously identi /uniFB01 ed by screening new immunotoxic and non-immunotoxic compounds. In our previous study, the sensitivity, speci /uniFB01 city and accuracy were 88%, 67% and 85%, respectively . The low speci /uniFB01 city was likely as a result of the fact that only three non-immunotoxic controls were examined. Therefore, in the present work, the performance of the classi /uniFB01 er genes is tested using an extended set of non-immunotoxic controls. The second aim is to predict the immunotoxicity of /uniFB01 ve compounds for which insuf /uniFB01 cient data are available. Next to the 25 marker genes identi /uniFB01 ed before, we selected eight additional genes that are known to be biomarkers for speci /uniFB01 c processes including T cell activation, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, cholesterol homeostasis and the cell cycle (Table 4). It was envisaged that the response of these genes in combination with the 25 markers for immunotoxicity will provide insight in to the mechanisms of action of the compounds. For assessing the mRNA expression response of the 33 genes to the 19 compounds in Jurkat cells, we used a Fluidigm high-throughput PCR system, which has proven to be a fast and reliable system to study gene expression . The set of 25 biomarkers yielded a sensitivity of 100%, speci /uniFB01 city of 80% and accuracy of 93%. This performance was better than that obtained in the previous validation experiment .
 ## Materials and Methods
 ## Chemicals
 All chemicals were ordered from Sigma-Aldrich (Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands), except anti-CD3 and IgG isotype control (Abcam, Cambridge, UK).
 ## Cell Culture
 The human T-lymphocyte cell line (Jurkat) was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Jurkat cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2mM glutamine, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 1mM nonessential amino acids, 100 U ml -1 penicillin and 100 µ gml -1 streptomycin (Invitrogen Life Science, Breda, The Netherlands). Cells were cultured at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in a humidi /uniFB01 ed atmosphere. The medium was refreshed three times a week.
 ## ATPlite Assay
 Cell viability was tested using the ATPlite assay (Perkin Elmer, Oosterhout, The Netherlands) which is based on the production of light caused by the reaction of ATP with luciferase and D-luciferin. The emitted light is proportional to the amount of ATP, which is a marker for cell viability. Jurkat cells were plated 20h before exposure in a 96-well plate (20 000 cells per well). Exposure was done in triplicate in 100 µ l medium in 96 well plates for 24 h to increasing concentrations of compounds, or to the vehicle controls. After exposure, the assay was performed according the manufacturer ' s protocol.
 
 ## Exposures
 Jurkat cells (passage number between 15 and 19) were seeded in six-well plates containing 2.7 ml (750 000 cells per well) per well. After growing the cells for 20 h, exposure was initiated by adding 0.3 ml of medium containing a non-cytotoxic concentration of the compounds or vehicle controls. Subsequently, cells were exposed to the compounds for 6 h. The maximum /uniFB01 nal dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) concentration in the medium was 0.1% (v/v) for all the samples which had no effect on viability. For each compound, exposures were performed on three different days. IgG was used as a control for the anti-CD3 exposures. DMSO was not present in either anti-CD3 or IgG treatments.
 ## RNA Isolation and Quality Control
 After exposure, the culture medium was removed after centrifugation of the cell suspension (5 min at 300 g , 4 °C). The resulting cell pellet was homogenized in 600 µ l lysis buffer (RLT) (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) supplemented with 10% β -mercaptoethanol and stored at -80°C until further processing. RNA was isolated with the QIAshredder kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer ' s protocol. Subsequently, RNA was puri /uniFB01 ed using the mRNeasy kit (Qiagen) including DNase treatment according to the manufacturer ' s protocol. RNA yield was assessed spectrophotometrically .
 ## Quantitative Real Time -PCR Veri /uniFB01 cation
 Detection of biomarker gene expression changes was performed at ServiceXS (ServiceXS B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands) using the 96.96 BioMark ™ Dynamic Array for Real-Time PCR (Fluidigm Corporation, San Francisco, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer ' s instructions. cDNA samples were synthesized using a miScript Reverse Transcription kit according to the manufacturer ' s protocol (Qiagen). Before use on the BioMark ™ array, the cDNA was /uniFB01 rst subjected to 14 cycles of Speci /uniFB01 c Target Ampli /uniFB01 cation (STA) using a 0.2× mixture of all Taqman Gene Expression assays in combination with the Taqman PreAmp Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), followed by /uniFB01 ve-fold dilution. Water was included as No Template Control (NTC) at the indicated positions. The No Template Controls were also included in the STA reaction, to serve as a true negative control for the entire procedure. After the 5× dilution, thermal cycling and real-time imaging of the BioMark ™ array was done on the BioMark ™ instrument, and threshold cycle (Ct) values were extracted using the BioMark ™ Real-Time PCR analysis software. Ct values were used to determine compound effects on mRNA expression levels. Pair-wise combinations of all samples were made with each of the assays in duplicate on the array. The empty assay positions were /uniFB01 lled with No Assay Controls, in which the 20× assay mix was substituted with water. The default Taqman PCR protocol was used on the BioMark ™ instrument with an annealing temperature of 60 °C and a total of 35 cycles of PCR.
 ## Analyzes of qRT -PCR Data
 At the end of each PCR cycle, data were collected from the 9216 reaction chambers on each array, and Ct values were extracted using the BioMark ™ RT -PCR analysis software version 3.0.2. The quality threshold was set at 0.65 (default value).
 The relative mRNA expression levels were calculated for each individual sample by applying the delta-delta-CT method. Three genes were selected as reference genes, based on the low variability of the relative mRNA expression levels quanti /uniFB01 ed by the microarrays performed before , being beta-2macroglobulin (B2M, highly abundant), Golgi to ER traf /uniFB01 c protein 4 (GET4, lowly abundant) and phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis class G1 (PIGG). Compounds are considered immunotoxic when one or more of the classi /uniFB01 er genes are affected by factor ≥ 2 vs. the control in at least two out of three replicates. Clustering of genes was performed using Cluster v3.0 (uncentered correlation; average linkage clustering) developed by Stanford University. Treeview was used for visualization of the clustering analysis.
 ## Functional Interpretation Based on ToxPi Analysis
 The 25 classi /uniFB01 ers were divided into eight functional classes (Table 3). The effects of each compound on these functional themes were visualized using ToxPi software from the US EPA . The mRNA levels of the 25 classi /uniFB01 er genes of the 16 compounds were used as the input for ToxPi software. ToxPi calculates a ToxPi score for each compound on each functional theme, and ranks the compounds by their overall ToxPi scores. The ToxPi score (between 0 to 1) is calculated by dividing the results of each chemical on the genes that are involved in this functional theme by the maximum results on the same genes from the 16 compounds.
 | Table 3. Functional themes in which the 25 classi /uniFB01 ers are involved                                                                                                                                                     | Table 3. Functional themes in which the 25 classi /uniFB01 ers are involved                                                                                                                                                                                 | |---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| | Category                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Genes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | | Regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis Metabolism and transport of cholesterol Cellular signal transduction Cellular stress responses Immune regulation Protein metabolism Retinoic acid metabolism Regulation of transcription | CCNG2, CRIM1, CHAC1, HSPA1B, ID1, ID2 HMGCS1, ABCA1, ABCG1 BZRAP1, ARRDC3, CRIM1, GPR18, KLHL24, CHAC1 KLF2, CHAC1, HSPA1B, HSPA5, NQO1, SRXN1, AK4, SLC7A11, VLDLR, TM6SF1, ABCA1, ABCG1 KLF2, VPREB1, ID1, ID2, CEBPB FBXO32, CRIM1, AK4 ALDH8A1 ID1, ID2 |
 ## qRT -PCR on Additional Genes for Functional Con /uniFB01 rmation
 Eight genes were selected for additional qRT -PCR experiments to con /uniFB01 rm the functional themes that were used in ToxPi analyzes. These genes were involved in processes such as T cell activation, apoptosis, ER stress, cholesterol homeostasis, immune regulation, cell cycle and regulation of transcription (Table 4). The qRT-PCR procedure was identical to the methods described above.
 ## Hierarchical Clustering
 Hierarchical clustering was performed with the programs Cluster (uncentered correlation; average linkage clustering) and Treeview . Red and green indicate up- and downregulation vs. average expression of control samples.
 ## Results
 ## ATPlite Assay
 The viability of Jurkat cells that were exposed to the different compounds was assessed by means of the ATPlite assay. Compound concentrations that lead to a decrease in viability of 20% or less after 24-h incubation (CV80) were selected for gene expression analysis, as published previously . For some compounds, the viability did not decrease after exposure to the highest concentration not giving rise to precipitation. In that case, this highest concentration was taken for further analysis. An overview of the viability data is presented in Fig. 1. The concentrations that were selected for exposures are listed in Table 2.
 ## Biomarker Characteristics
 The qRT -PCR data were subjected to hierarchical clustering analysis (the outcome is visualized in the heat-map in Fig. 2). The results of the qRT -PCR analysis are also shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. All nine known immunotoxicant are classi /uniFB01 ed as immunotoxic based on the 25 gene markers. The sensitivity is therefore 100%. For the known non-immunotoxicants, four out of /uniFB01 ve were correctly classi /uniFB01 ed as non-immunotoxic. Benzo-e-pyrene downregulated one gene (HMGCS1) and is consequently classi /uniFB01 ed as false positive. The speci /uniFB01 city of this set is therefore 80%. The overall accuracy is 93%.The performance
 
 characteristics of the present analysis are also shown in Supplementary Table S1.
 ## Compounds with Unknown Immunotoxic Properties
 This study included four compounds for which the immunotoxic properties have not been precisely described. The reason for including these compounds was to verify whether the expression pro /uniFB01 les of these 25 marker genes can provide more insight into the modes of action and point towards possible immunotoxic properties of these compounds. Chlorantraniliprole upregulates two genes (GPR18 and SLC7A11) and is classi /uniFB01 ed as immunotoxic. Hidrasec upregulates seven genes and downregulates one and is also classi /uniFB01 ed as immunotoxic. Imidacloprid and Sunset yellow do not affect any of the genes and are therefore considered not immunotoxic.
 ## ToxPi Analyzes
 We categorized the 25 candidate classi /uniFB01 er genes into eight functional themes, based on the major GO processes and molecular functions that these genes are involved in (Table 3). The ToxPi tool was then used to gain insight into the modes of action of the compounds. Results of this analysis are shown in pie graphs in Fig. 3. A /uniFB01 rst observation is that all compounds affected protein metabolism to an almost similar degree. Based on similarities in ToxPi results, the compounds could be classi /uniFB01 ed into three groups. The /uniFB01 rst group was formed by zearalenone, Hidrasec and As2O3 which all affected genes in cellular signal transduction and cellular stress responses (panel A). Next to these similarities, zearalenone affects immune regulation and Hidrasec affects retinoic acid metabolism which are processes that are hardly affected by the other two compounds.
 Two compounds with almost a similar pie graph, but no similarities in structure are 2,3-DCP and cypermethrin (panel B). Both compounds affect protein metabolism and cholesterol metabolism and transport. In addition, cypermethrin affects immune regulation and transcription regulation that are not or to a lesser extent regulated by 2,3-DCP. ToxPi analysis of four compounds, chlorpyrifos, benzo-e-pyrene, aldicarb and anti-CD3, resulted in similar pie graphs (panel C). These four compounds all affect cholesterol metabolism and transport, protein metabolism and transcription regulation, and to a lesser extent retinoic acid metabolism and immune regulation.
 | Table 4. Overview of eight gene markers for investigating possible modes of action   | Table 4. Overview of eight gene markers for investigating possible modes of action    | Table 4. Overview of eight gene markers for investigating possible modes of action   | Table 4. Overview of eight gene markers for investigating possible modes of action   | Table 4. Overview of eight gene markers for investigating possible modes of action   | |--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| | Gene Symbol                                                                          | Description                                                                           | Process                                                                              | mRNA accession                                                                       | Taqman assay                                                                         | | CD69                                                                                 | Cluster of Differentiation 69                                                         | T cell activation                                                                    | NM_001781                                                                            | hs00934033_m1                                                                        | | DDIT3                                                                                | DNA damage inducible transcript 3                                                     | DNA damage, apoptosis                                                                | NM_001195053                                                                         | Hs00358796_g1                                                                        | | DDIT4                                                                                | DNA damage inducible transcript 4                                                     | Immune regulation                                                                    | NM_019058                                                                            | Hs01111686_g1                                                                        | | HERPUD1                                                                              | Homocysteine-responsive endoplasmic reticulum-resident ubiquitin-like domain member 1 | ER stress / Unfolded protein response                                                | NM_001010989                                                                         | Hs01124269_m1                                                                        | | LGALS1                                                                               | Galectin-1                                                                            | Apoptosis, cell cycle                                                                | NM_002305                                                                            | Hs00355202_m1                                                                        | | SGK1                                                                                 | Serine/threonine-protein kinase 1                                                     | Regulation of transcription                                                          | NM_001143676                                                                         | Hs00985033_g1                                                                        | | SQLE                                                                                 | squalene epoxidase                                                                    | Cholesterol homeostasis                                                              | NM_003129                                                                            | Hs01123768_m1                                                                        | | TRIB3                                                                                | Tribbles homolog 3                                                                    | Apoptosis, ER stress                                                                 | NM_021158                                                                            | hs01082394_m1                                                                        |
 Figure 1. Average viability of compounds as measured by ATPlite assay. Results are based on at least three biological replicates of Jurkat cells and viability is corrected for solvent control dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Average viability is shown on the Y -axis as percentage to DMSO, compound concentrations are present on the X -axis in µ M. Exceptions *Anti CD3 was dosed in ng µ l -1 and was corrected for the IgG control. ** PHA-L was dosed in ng ml -1 .
 
 
 ## Effects on Mode of Action (MOA) Signature Genes
 In order to validate the MOAs identi /uniFB01 ed with the present study, we also performed qRT -PCR for all compounds on eight additional genes with known functions. An overview of the primers for these genes is given in Table 4. Seven compounds resulted in signi /uniFB01 cantly altered expression of at least one of the eight genes. The results of the PCR experiments for these seven compounds are visualized as bar graphs in Fig. 4. PHA-L upregulated the early T cell activation marker CD69 , which corresponds to the mechanism of action of T cell activation. CD69 was also upregulated by TBBPA which indicates that this compound induces T cell activation as well. TBBPA also induced expression of HERPUD1, a known marker for an induced
 
 Figure 2. Average expression of n =25 classi /uniFB01 er genes in human Jurkat T cells exposed to 18 different compounds. Values represent the average ± SD of technical duplicates. Each compound is tested in three independent biological replicates. The order of the genes was determined by hierarchical clustering. Red indicates that the particular gene is upregulated, green indicates a downregulation and grey represents missing values. Colour scale represents 2log ratios vs. vehicle control.
 
 Figure 3. Visualization of the effects of example compounds on eight functional themes. The pie graphs visualize the effects of each compound on the functional themes as listed in the table (left side of Fig. 3A). Each pie represents one compound. Each piece of the pie represents one single functional theme. The eight functional themes were weighted equally, so the graphic widths of all slices are equal. The size of each piece (the distance to the centre, between 0 to 1) shows the ToxPi score that was calculated by the ToxPi software. Pie graphs are shown for the following compounds: (A) Zearalenone, Hidrasec and As2O3; (B) 2.3-DCP and cypermethrin; and (C) Chlorpyrifos, benzo-e-pyrene, aldicarb and anti-CD3.
 
 Figure 4. Average expression of genes indicating modes of action. Performance of eight qRT -PCR genes that are involved in T cell activation and proliferation (CD69 and LGALS1), DNA damage and apoptosis (DDIT3, DDIT4 and TRIB3), ER stress induction (HERPUD1), cellular stress response (SGK1) and sterol biosynthesis (SQLE). Data are based on three independent biological replicates. * P &lt; 0.05 and ** P &lt; 0.01 compared with the control (Student ' s t -test). Y-axis: Fold change as corrected by DMSO and reference genes.
 
 
 unfolded protein response that may lead to ER stress . Other compounds that increased the expression of HERPUD1 and are thus likely to induce ER stress are Hidrasec and 2,3-DCP. 2,3-DCP downregulated SQLE, which is involved in cholesterol metabolism and transport . This decrease of cholesterol metabolism supports the biological interpretation based on the 25 classi /uniFB01 er genes for 2,3-DCP in Fig. 3A. SQLE was also downregulated by anti-CD3 and zearalenone, and upregulated by chlorpyrifos and hidrasec which is in agreement with the results shown in Fig. 3A, B. SGK1 codes for a protein that is involved in cell growth, survival, migration and the cellular stress response . SGK1 was upregulated by anti-CD3 and chlorpyrifos. Hidrasec downregulated LGALS1, a gene that is involved in the cell cycle and apoptosis, which also supports the outcome of ToxPi analysis. LGALS1 was also downregulated by chlorpyrifos and upregulated by anti-CD3, however, regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis was not obvious from the pie graphs for these compounds (Fig. 3).
 Of the compounds that were immunotoxic based on the classi /uniFB01 ers, As2O3, aldicarb and cypermethrin did not affect any of the additional genes. Furthermore, benzo-e-pyrene, the false positive as based on the 25 identi /uniFB01 ers had also no effect on these additional genes. Moreover, the compounds selected as non-immunotoxic did not change the expression of any of the eight additional genes.
 ## Discussion
 The identi /uniFB01 cation and validation of the 25 classi /uniFB01 er genes was performed previously on a training set of 36 immunotoxic and 8 non-immunotoxic compounds, and an external veri /uniFB01 cation set of 17 immunotoxic and 3 non-immunotoxic compounds . The classi /uniFB01 ers were chosen in such a way that they covered a broad range of molecular mechanisms of action.
 The present study was designed for two purposes, being (1) further validation of the 25 classi /uniFB01 ers with additional immunotoxicants and non-immunotoxic control compounds, and (2) application of the classi /uniFB01 ers to screen a group of compounds for which human immunotoxicity has not yet been fully established. For the /uniFB01 rst purpose, we exposed Jurkat cells to nine known immunotoxicants and /uniFB01 ve known non-immunotoxicants. These compounds included new compound classes that have
 not tested before, such as the polybrominated /uniFB02 ame retardant TBBPA and the biological anti-CD3. The four compounds selected for the second purpose were the neonicotinoid imidacloprid, the insecticide chlorantraniliprole, the antidiarrheal drug hidrasec and the food additive Sunset yellow FCF. In this second round of validation, the 25 classi /uniFB01 ers generated a higher sensitivity (100% vs. 88%), speci /uniFB01 city (80% vs. 67 %) and overall accuracy (93% vs. 85 %) than obtained in our previous validation . When the results of our present study were combined with those of Shao et al . , the sensitivity, speci /uniFB01 city and accuracy would be 91%, 71% and 85%, respectively. In addition, we show that the 25 classi /uniFB01 ers correctly predicted the immunotoxicity of compounds from classes not tested before in the Jurkat assay including TBBPA, anti CD3, chlorpyrifos, PHA-L and 2,3-DCP.
 This current exercise resulted in only one false positive (benzo-e-pyrene). Benzo-e-pyrene is a structural analogue of benzo-a-pyrene which is a known immunotoxicant . Although benzo-e-pyrene is used as a nonimmunosuppressive control for polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure , some studies indicate slight immunotoxic effects of benzo-e-pyrene . The only gene that was regulated by benzo-e-pyrene was HMGCS1, which is regulated in cholesterol metabolism and transport .
 We investigated possible mode of actions of the test compounds using ToxPi analysis based on the expression of the 25 classi /uniFB01 er genes. In addition, we performed PCR on eight additional genes, in order to support the putative MOAs we identi/uniFB01 ed with the 25 classi /uniFB01 ers. None of the non-immunotoxic compounds in the present study affected the expression of the eight additional genes tested. We determined the fold changes in expression of these eight additional genes regarding the 31 compounds of the previous study . Also in this study the non-immunotoxic compounds did not alter the expression of any of the eight additional genes (results not shown).
 TBBPA is known to induce oxidative stress followed by DNA damage  and stimulate immune cells . In our study, TBBPA induced expression of the T cell activation marker CD69, which corresponds to the results of Koike et al. , but also upregulates ER stress/UPR gene HERPUD1 , which is a new /uniFB01 nding (Fig. 4). In addition, TBBPA upregulated the pro-apoptosis marker CHAC1  almost four times. Furthermore, TBBPA is known to induce cell death (in Sertoli cells) by affecting calcium homeostasis . Disruption of calcium homeostasis in T cells may lead to ER stress . Cells that do not recover from ER stress will undergo apoptotic events.
 Induction of ER stress is not limited to immune cells; however, immune cells are more sensitive to ER stress inducing compounds such as deoxynivalenol and tributyltin oxide. Previously we demonstrated that T cells are more sensitive because of the fact that ER stress leads to a leakage of calcium ions from the ER, leading to a calcium signal that in turn generates a T cell activation response, which is a measure for immunotoxicity . Although ER stress may occur in other cells as well (at higher concentrations than in immune cells), in those cells this will not lead to a T cell activation response.
 Currently, the mechanism by which the mycotoxin zearalenone exerts its immunotoxicity is not clear. We show that zearalenone affects genes in cellular stress responses,
 
 cholesterol metabolism/transport, immune regulation, cellular signal transduction, cell cycle and apoptosis and transcription. In addition, zearalenone downregulated one of the eight additional genes tested, SQLE, which is involved in cholesterol metabolism. The fact that some of the immunotoxic compounds affect genes involved in cholesterol metabolism might very well re /uniFB02 ect the cellular response to disruption of cholesterol homeostasis.
 Based on our results obtained with the 25 classi /uniFB01 er genes, 2,3DCP mainly affects cholesterol metabolism and transport and protein metabolism. PCR analysis of additional genes, such as HERPUD1 and SQLE, supported these /uniFB01 ndings. A previous study indicated that 2,3-DCP inhibits T cell activation and downregulates activation of transduction pathways in vitro (mouse T cells puri /uniFB01 ed from splenocytes) and mice in vivo . However, 2,3-DCP did not signi /uniFB01 cantly affect expression of the T cell activation marker CD69 in the present study. This is most likely caused by the fact that Jurkat cells generally were cultured without stimulus (PHA/LPS). An inhibition of T cell activation is therefore hard to detect.
 In the present study, chlorpyrifos induces cellular stress responses and cholesterol biosynthesis in Jurkat T cells. Previous studies found that chlorpyrifos induced oxidative stress . Also, chlorpyrifos induces hyperlipidaemia, a state in which cholesterol synthesis is elevated in rats  which is in line with the results obtained in our study.
 Of the four compounds that might be immunotoxic, chlorantraniliprole and Hidrasec were classi /uniFB01 ed as immunotoxic, and the other two (imidacloprid and Sunset yellow) as nonimmunotoxic, as based on the genetic markers used in this Jurkat study. Imidacloprid has been tested immunotoxic in rats and mice in vivo . No data were available on human immune cells. Imidacloprid does not affect any of the 25 classi /uniFB01 ers or eight additional genes tested in this study. Sunset yellow is known to affect monocytes but no other blood cells in mice in vivo . Apparently, Sunset yellow is also not toxic for human Jurkat T cells. This result points to the limitation of the current assay that compounds targeting types of immune cells other than T cells might be not detected. Both chlorantraniliprole and Hidrasec were assessed non-immunotoxic in rodent immunotoxicity studies. The discrepancy between the outcome of the animal studies and the current Jurkat study with these compounds might be as a result of inter-species differences. It is generally recognized that the predictability of rodent studies for human toxicity is rather low . For this reason, the US National Research Council, and other organisations, developed a future vision in which animal models are being replaced by human in vitro models Schmidt . Chlorantraniliprole is suspected to act on release of calcium from intracellular calcium stores  that is known to lead to T cell activation in T cells . Chlorantraniliprole mainly affects cellular stress and signal response pathways in our present experiments. One of the genes upregulated by chlorantraniliprole is SLC7A11 (alias XCT). SLC7A11 represents the rate limiting step of glutathione synthesis, and overexpression of SLC7A11 reduces the need for calcium for early cell cycle progression in the early cell cycle .
 In conclusion, we have proven the good prediction performance of the Jurkat T cell screening system based on 25 classi/uniFB01 ers when challenged by new classes of immunotoxicants. The
 10991263, 2015, 7, Downloaded from https:/analyticalsciencejournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jat.3079 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [22/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https:/onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by th
 
 sensitivity, speci /uniFB01 city and accuracy were even slightly higher in the present study as compared with the previous study. In addition to its use for predicting direct immunotoxicity, this set of genes can be exploited to give indications for the modes of action of compounds. This system however may not detect compounds that exert immunotoxic action on other immune cells than T cells, which likely is the case for Sunset yellow. Therefore, the Jurkat T cell line is a valuable model for immunotoxicity screening not on itself but as part of an integrated testing strategy.
 ## Acknowledgments
 This study was /uniFB01 nancially supported by the Netherlands Genomics Initiative, the Netherlands Toxicogenomics Centre (grant 05060510).
 ## Con /uniFB02 ict of Interest
 The authors did not report any con /uniFB02 ict of interest.
 ## References
 - Abbes S, Ben Salah-Abbes J, Shara /uniFB01 H, Oueslati R, Noghabi KA. 2013. Lactobacillus paracasei BEJ01 prevents immunotoxic effects during chronic zearalenone exposure in Balb/c mice. Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol. 35 : 341 -348.
- Acker CI, Nogueira CW. 2012. Chlorpyrifos acute exposure induces hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia in rats. Chemosphere 89 : 602 -608.
- Amato R, D ' Antona L, Porciatti G, Agosti V, Menniti M, Rinaldo C, Costa N, Bellacchio E, Mattarocci S, Fuiano G, Soddu S, Paggi MG, Lang F, Perrotti N. 2009. Sgk1 activates MDM2-dependent p53 degradation and affects cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. J. Mol. Med. (Berl.) 87 : 1221 -1239.
- Ambali S, Akanbi D, Igbokwe N, Shittu M, Kawu M, Ayo J. 2007. Evaluation of subchronic chlorpyrifos poisoning on hematological and serum biochemical changes in mice and protective effect of vitamin C. J. Toxicol. Sci. 32 : 111 -120.
- Badgujar PC, Jain SK, Singh A, Punia JS, Gupta RP, Chandratre GA. 2013. Immunotoxic effects of imidacloprid following 28 days of oral exposure in BALB/c mice. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 35 : 408 -418.
- Birnbaum LS, Staskal DF. 2004. Brominated /uniFB02 ame retardants: cause for concern? Environ. Health Perspect. 112 : 9 -17.
- Bonne AC, den Bieman MG, Gillissen GF, van Lith HA, van Zutphen LF. 2002. Chromosomal localization of genes involved in biosynthesis, metabolism or transport of cholesterol in the rat. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 97 : 183 -186.
- Boorman GA, Luster MI, Dean JH, Campbell ML. 1982. Assessment of myelotoxicity caused by environmental chemicals. Environ. Health Perspect. 43 : 129 -135.
- Borak J, Hosgood HD. 2007. Seafood arsenic: implications for human risk assessment. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 47 : 204 -212.
- Choi JS, Lee YJ, Kim TH, Lim HJ, Ahn MY, Kwack SJ, Kang TS, Park KL, Lee J, Kim ND, Jeong TC, Kim SG, Jeong HG, Lee BM, Kim HS. 2011. Molecular Mechanism of Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA)-induced Target Organ Toxicity in Sprague-Dawley Male Rats. Toxicol. Res. 27 : 61 -70.
- Davila DR, Lane JL, Lauer FT, Burchiel SW. 1999. Protein tyrosine kinase activation by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in human HPB-ALL T cells. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A 56 : 249 -261.
- Davila DR, Romero DL, Burchiel SW. 1996. Human T cells are highly sensitive to suppression of mitogenesis by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and this effect is differentially reversed by alpha-naphtho /uniFB02 avone. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 139 : 333 -341.
- Dunier M, Siwicki AK, Demael A. 1991. Effects of organophosphorus insecticides: effects of trichlorfon and dichlorvos on the immune response of carp (Cyprinus carpio). III. In vitro effects on lymphocyte proliferation and phagocytosis and in vivo effects on humoral response. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 22 : 79 -87.
- EC. 2006. Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC. EC (ed). OJ L; 1-849diuron Immunotoxicity. http://apps.echa.europa.eu/registered/data/dossiers/DISS-9d864497d81a-5ced-e044-00144f67d249/AGGR-ad88c783-e215-4ee3-8ac8-7fe393b61600\_DISS-9d864497-d81a-5ced-e044-00144f67d249.html  - Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D. 1998. Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95 : 14863 -14868.
- EMEA. 2006. Note for guidance on immunotoxicity studies for human pharmaceuticals. In ICH Topic S 8 Immunotoxicity Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals , Agency EM (ed). 13.
- EPA. 2013. Part 158 Toxicology Data Requirements: Guidance for Neurotoxicity Battery, Subchronic Inhalation, Subchronic Dermal and Immunotoxicity Studies. Of /uniFB01 ce of Pesticide Programs USEPA (ed). 11.
- FDA. 2002. Guidance for Industry -Immunotoxicology Evaluation of Investigational New Drugs. (CDER) USDoHaHSFaDACfDEaR (ed). ICCVAM; 35 - Fernandez-Riejos P, Goberna R, Sanchez-Margalet V. 2008. Leptin promotes cell survival and activates Jurkat T lymphocytes by stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 151 : 505 -518.
- Fischer AM, Mercer JC, Iyer A, Ragin MJ, August A. 2004. Regulation of CXC chemokine receptor 4-mediated migration by the Tec family tyrosine kinase ITK. J. Biol. Chem. 279 : 29816 -29820.
- Gawade L, Dadarkar SS, Husain R, Gatne M. 2013. A detailed study of developmental immunotoxicity of imidacloprid in Wistar rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 51 : 61 -70.
- Gultekin F, Delibas N, Yasar S, Kilinc I. 2001. In vivo changes in antioxidant systems and protective role of melatonin and a combination of vitamin C and vitamin E on oxidative damage in erythrocytes induced by chlorpyrifos-ethyl in rats. Arch. Toxicol. 75 : 88 -96.
- Gwack Y, Feske S, Srikanth S, Hogan PG, Rao A. 2007. Signalling to transcription: store-operated Ca2+ entry and NFAT activation in lymphocytes. Cell Calcium 42 : 145 -156.
- Hashem MM, Atta AH, Arbid MS, Nada SA, Asaad GF. 2010. Immunological studies on Amaranth, Sunset Yellow and Curcumin as food colouring agents in albino rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 48 : 1581 -1586.
- Hori O, Ichinoda F, Yamaguchi A, Tamatani T, Taniguchi M, Koyama Y, Katayama T, Tohyama M, Stern DM, Ozawa K, Kitao Y, Ogawa S. 2004. Role of Herp in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response. Genes Cells 9 : 457 -469.
- Horton JD, Goldstein JL, Brown MS. 2002. SREBPs: activators of the complete program of cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis in the liver. J. Clin. Invest. 109 : 1125 -1131.
- Institoris L, Siroki O, Desi I, Lesznyak J, Serenyi P, Szekeres E, Petri I. 1998. Extension of the protocol of OECD guideline 407 (28-day repeated dose oral toxicity test in the rat) to detect potential immunotoxicity of chemicals. Hum. Exp. Toxicol. 17 : 206 -211.
- Ishiguro K, Xavier R. 2004. Homer-3 regulates activation of serum response element in T cells via its EVH1 domain. Blood 103 : 2248 -2256. Jin Y, Zheng S, Fu Z. 2011. Embryonic exposure to cypermethrin induces sh - apoptosis and immunotoxicity in zebra /uniFB01 sh (Danio rerio). Fish Shell /uniFB01 Immunol. 30 : 1049 -1054.
- Katika MR, Hendriksen PJ, de Ruijter NC, van Loveren H, Peijnenburg A. 2012a. Immunocytological and biochemical analysis of the mode of action of bis (tri-n-butyltin) tri-oxide (TBTO) in Jurkat cells. Toxicol. Lett. 212 : 126 -136.
- Katika MR, Hendriksen PJ, Shao J, van Loveren H, Peijnenburg A. 2012b. Transcriptome analysis of the human T lymphocyte cell line Jurkat and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells exposed to deoxynivalenol (DON): New mechanistic insights. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 264 : 51 -64.
- Koike E, Yanagisawa R, Takigami H, Takano H. 2013. Brominated /uniFB02 ameretardants stimulate mouse immune cells in vitro. J. Appl. Toxicol. 33 : 1451 -1459.
- Krieger JA, Davila DR, Lytton J, Born JL, Burchiel SW. 1995. Inhibition of sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPases (SERCA) by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in HPB-ALL human T cells and other tissues. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 133 : 102 -108.
 - Lahm GP, Selby TP, Freudenberger JH, Stevenson TM, Myers BJ, Seburyamo G, Smith BK, Flexner L, Clark CE, Cordova D. 2005. Insecticidal anthranilic diamides: a new class of potent ryanodine receptor activators. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 15 : 4898 -4906.
- Lankveld DP, Van Loveren H, Baken KA, Vandebriel RJ. 2010. In vitro testing for direct immunotoxicity: state of the art. Methods Mol. Biol. 598 : 401 -423.
- Lastro M, Kourtidis A, Farley K, Conklin DS. 2008. xCT expression reduces the early cell cycle requirement for calcium signaling. Cell. Signal. 20 : 390 -399.
- Lu J, Huang G, Zhang S, Song B, Wang Z, Xu L, Zhang S, Guan S. 2013. The inhibition of 2,3-dichloro-1-propanol on T cell in vitro and in vivo. Int. Immunopharmacol. 17 : 321 -328.
- Mirkin IR, Anderson HA, Hanrahan L, Hong R, Golubjatnikov R, Belluck D. 1990. Changes in T-lymphocyte distribution associated with ingestion of aldicarb-contaminated drinking water: a follow-up study. Environ. Res. 51 : 35 -50.
- Mitsuishi Y, Falkenrodt A, Urlacher A, Tongio MM, Mayer S. 1986. New human MHC class I antigens segregating with HLA-A antigens detected on some lymphocyte subpopulations. Hum. Immunol. 15 : 175 -197.
- Mungrue IN, Pagnon J, Kohannim O, Gargalovic PS, Lusis AJ. 2009. CHAC1/MGC4504 is a novel proapoptotic component of the unfolded protein response, downstream of the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP cascade. J. Immunol. 182 : 466 -476.
- Noworyta-Glowacka J, Bankowski R, Siennicka J, Wiadrowska B, Ludwicki JK. 2012. In /uniFB02 uence of chlorpyrifos on the pro /uniFB01 le of subpopulations of immunoactive cells and their phagocytic activity in an experimental in vivo model. Ann. Agric. Environ. Med. 19 : 483 -486.
- Ogunbayo OA, Lai PF, Connolly TJ, Michelangeli F. 2008. Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA), induces cell death in TM4 Sertoli cells by modulating Ca2+ transport proteins and causing dysregulation of Ca2+ homeostasis. Toxicol. In Vitro 22 : 943 -952.
- Pullen S, Boecker R, Tiegs G. 2003. The /uniFB02 ame retardants tetrabromobisphenol A and tetrabromobisphenol A-bisallylether suppress the induction of interleukin-2 receptor alpha chain (CD25) in murine splenocytes. Toxicology 184 : 11 -22.
- Reif DM, Sypa M, Lock EF, Wright FA, Wilson A, Cathey T, Judson RR, Rusyn I. 2013. ToxPi GUI: an interactive visualization tool for transparent integration of data from diverse sources of evidence. Bioinformatics 29 : 402 -403.
- Sakurai T, Kojima C, Ochiai M, Ohta T, Fujiwara K. 2004. Evaluation of in vivo acute immunotoxicity of a major organic arsenic compound arsenobetaine in seafood. Int. Immunopharmacol. 4 : 179 -184.
- Schmeits PC, Katika MR, Peijnenburg AA, van Loveren H, Hendriksen PJ. 2014. DON shares a similar mode of action as the ribotoxic stress inducer anisomycin while TBTO shares ER stress patterns with the ER - stress inducer thapsigargin based on comparative gene expression pro /uniFB01 ling in Jurkat T cells. Toxicol. Lett. 224 : 395 -406.
- Schmeits PC, Volger OL, Zandvliet ET, van Loveren H, Peijnenburg AA, Hendriksen PJ. 2013. Assessment of the usefulness of the murine cytotoxic T cell line CTLL-2 for immunotoxicity screening by transcriptomics. Toxicol. Lett. 217 : 1 -13.
- Schmidt CW. 2009. TOX 21: new dimensions of toxicity testing. Environ Health Perspect . 117 : A348 -353.
- Shanks N, Greek R, Greek J. 2009. Are animal models predictive for humans? Philos. Ethics Humanit. Med. 4 : 2.
- Shao J, Berger LF, Hendriksen PJ, Peijnenburg AA, van Loveren H, Volger OL. 2014. Transcriptome-based functional classi /uniFB01 ers for direct immunotoxicity. Arch. Toxicol. 88 : 673 -689.
- Shao J, Katika MR, Schmeits PC, Hendriksen PJ, van Loveren H, Peijnenburg AA, Volger OL. 2013. Toxicogenomics-based identi /uniFB01 cation of mechanisms for direct immunotoxicity. Toxicol. Sci. 135 : 328 -346.
- Smialowicz RJ, Simmons JE, Luebke RW, Allis JW. 1991. Immunotoxicologic assessment of subacute exposure of rats to carbon tetrachloride with comparison to hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 17 : 186 -196.
- Thomas PT, Ratajczak HV, Eisenberg WC, Furedi-Machacek M, Ketels KV, Barbera PW. 1987. Evaluation of host resistance and immunity in mice exposed to the carbamate pesticide aldicarb. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 9 : 82 -89.
- Weetall M, Digan ME, Hugo R, Mathew S, Hopf C, Tart-Risher N, Zhang J, Shi V, Fu F, Hammond-McKibben D, West S, Brack R, Brinkmann V, Bergman R, Neville D, Jr, Lake P. 2002. T-cell depletion and graft survival induced by anti-human CD3 immunotoxins in human CD3epsilon transgenic mice. Transplantation 73 : 1658 -1666.
- White KL, Jr., McLoughlin CE, Auttachoat W, Smith MJ. 2012. Validation of the Candida albicans delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) model in the female B(6)C(3)F(1) mouse for use in immunotoxicological investigations. J. Immunotoxicol. 9 : 141 -147.
- Yadav A, Kumar A, Tripathi A, Das M. 2013. Sunset yellow FCF, a permitted food dye, alters functional responses of splenocytes at noncytotoxic dose. Toxicol. Lett. 217 : 197 -204.
- Ziegler SF, Ramsdell F, Alderson MR. 1994. The activation antigen CD69. Stem Cells 12 : 456 -465.
 
 ## SUPPORTING INFORMATION
 Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ' s web-site.