## Protective efficacy of Anopheles minimus CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 against cytotoxicity of pyrethroid insecticides in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) insect cells
 Duangkaew, P. 1 , Kaewpa, D. 2  and Rongnoparut, P. 1*
 1  Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand 10400
 2  Division of Biology, Faculty of Science and Technology, Rajamangala University of Technology Thanyaburi,
 Pathum Thani, Thailand 12110
 *  Correspondence author email: scprn@mahidol.ac.th
 - Received 15 November 2010; received in revised form 6 January 2011; accepted 23 January 2011
 Abstract. Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (P450s) are enzymes known to metabolize a wide variety of compounds including insecticides. Their overexpression leading to enhanced insecticide  detoxification  could  result  in  insecticide  resistance  in  insects.  The  increased mRNA expression of two P450 genes, CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 ,  has  been  previously observed in  laboratory -selected deltamethrin-resistant Anopheles minimus ,  a  major  malaria  vector  in Southeast Asia, suggesting their role in detoxification of pyrethroids. In this study CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 were expressed in insect Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9)  cells  via  baculovirusdirected  expression  system.  Insecticide  detoxification  capabilities  of  Sf9  cells  with  and without expression of CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3 were evaluated using 3-(4,5-dimethyl-thiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium  bromide  (MTT)  assays.  The  results  revealed  that  CYP6P7-  or CYP6AA3-expressing cells showed significantly higher cytoprotective capability than parental Sf9  cells  against  cytotoxicity  of  pyrethroids  including  permethrin,  cypermethrin  and deltamethrin.  Such  cytoprotective  effect  was  not  observed  for  bioallethrin  (pyrethroid), chlorpyrifos (organophosphate) and propoxur (carbamate). Moreover, expression of CYP6AA3, but not CYP6P7, could protect cells against λ -cyhalothrin cytotoxicity. In MTT assays upon co-incubation with piperonyl butoxide (P450 inhibitor), cytoprotective ability of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 against deltamethrin was diminished, implying that pyrethroid detoxification was due to activities  of  P450  enzymes.  Insecticide  detoxification  capabilities  of  CYP6P7  and CYP6AA3 observed from MTT assays were correlated to their pyrethroid metabolizing activities observed from in  vitro reconstitution  enzymatic  assays.  Thus  MTT  assays  using  cells expressing P450 enzymes of interest could be primarily used to determine detoxification activities  of  enzymes  against  cytotoxic  insecticides.
 ## INTRODUCTION
 Control  of  mosquito  vectors  relying  on applications with chemical insecticides is an  important  strategy  in  preventing transmission  of  vector-borne  diseases, including malaria. Pyrethroid insecticides are currently used worldwide in agriculture and for vector control, however long-term extensive use of insecticides has been a major cause of development of insecticide resistance  among mosquito populations .  Con- sequently, resistance can lead to reduced efficacy  of  vector  control  programme. Pyrethroid resistance in mosquito vectors of malaria  has  been  reported  in  several countries  in  Africa  and  Southeast  Asia, including Thailand .
 Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (P450s) comprise a superfamily of enzymes that catalyze metabolisms of endogenous and  xenobiotic  compounds,  including
 insecticides . Examinations  of  various  insects  have  suggested involvement  of  P450s  in  resistance  to different insecticides, by virtue of enhanced expression of P450s and thus increased detoxification of insecticides. . Overexpression of P450s has been observed in several pyrethroid resistant insects  such  as  increased  expression  of CYP6D1 has  been  found  in  pyrethroid resistant Musca domestica , CYP6P3 and CYP6M2 in  multiple pyrethroid resistant Anopheles  gambiae .
 Anopheles minimus is  one  of  malaria vectors in Southeast Asia, including Thailand, Loas, Cambodia, and Vietnam. We previously determined that P450 enzymes might act as a primary route of deltamethrin detoxification  during  laboratory  selection  for deltamethrin resistance in An.  minimus . In parallel during selection, increased mRNA expression of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 was observed  .  Thus  CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 could be implicated to play a role in  detoxification  of  deltamethrin  in  this mosquito.
 Pyrethroids are known to commonly target  on  sodium  channels  of  nervous system. Other toxic effects of pyrethroids toward cells include causing DNA damage, inhibition of mitochondrial complex I, and induction  of  reactive  oxygen  species (ROS) accumulation .  Cytotoxic  effects  of organophosphate and carbamate insecticides  have  also  been  reported  such  as oxidative stress, alteration of mitochondria function .  Thus treatment of cells with cytotoxic insecticides in  cytotoxicity  assays  can  cause  cell mortality  unless  cells  possess  ability  to detoxify insecticides. This is supported by that Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) insect cells expressing  CYP6AA3 have significantly higher cell viability  upon  treatment with deltamethrin than cells without CYP6AA3 expression  in  MTT  cytotoxicity  assay, suggesting that CYP6AA3 could detoxify deltamethrin in Sf9 cells .
 In  this  study,  we  further  employed MTT cytotoxicity  assays  to  investigate detoxification  capability  of  Sf9  cells expressing CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3 against pyrethroid, organophosphate and carbamate insecticides  that  are  commonly  used  in Thailand. Enzymatic assays of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3  against insecticides were performed and compared to results obtained from MTT assays.
 ## MATERIALS AND METHODS
 ## Chemicals
 The chemical compounds including deltamethrin, permethrin, cypermethrin, λ -cyhalothrin,  bioallethrin,  chlorpyrifos, propoxur, leupeptin, phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and  piperonyl  butoxide  (PBO)  were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) were purchased from USB (Cleveland, OH).
 ## Cell culture and baculovirus-mediated insect cell expression of P450 proteins
 The Sf9 insect cell line and SF-900 II SFM culture  media  were  purchased  from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA), and Sf9 cells were cultured in SF900 II serum-free media at 28ºC. The recombinant baculovirus, either containing  CYP6AA3  or  CYP6P7,  was produced following manufacturer's instruction as previously described .  Briefly,  CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3 cDNA isolated from deltamethrin resistant An. minimus  was subcloned into the  transfer  vector  pBacPAK8  (BD  Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA), co-transfected with a linearized BacPAK6 viral DNA into Sf9 cells. The resulting  recombinant  virus,  upon purification, was used in the expression of enzymes. For cytotoxicity assays, Sf9 cells were infected with CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3 recombinant virus at multiplicity of infection (moi) equal to 1. After 72 hours post-infection,
 cells expressing CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3 were harvested and seeded onto 24-well plate for cytotoxicity  assays.  These  conditions followed the methods described by Kaewpa et al.  and Boonsuepsakul et al . . Expression of P450 proteins was detected by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).
 Expression  of  P450s  for in  vitro enzymatic activity assay was performed as described by Boonsuepsakul et al . . In brief,  Sf9  cells  were  infected  with  either CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3-expressed virus at moi equal to 3.  The  infected  cells  were harvested at 70-80 hours post-infection and resuspended in sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.2 containing 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, 5  µg/ml  leupeptin,  0.1  mM  DTT,  and  20% glycerol. The harvested cells were lysed and subjected  to  differential  centrifugation, resulting in microsomal pellet which was solubilized in sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.2  containing  150  mM  KCl  and  1%  (v/v) Triton X-100. The microsomes of Sf9 cells infected with either CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3 recombinant virus were used in enzymatic reconstitution assays as described in Kaewpa et  al .  .  The  expressed  proteins  in microsomal fractions were observed by SDSPAGE and total P450 content was measured by reduced-CO difference spectrum analysis according to Omura &amp; Sato .
 ## Cell  treatment and MTT cytotoxicity assays
 Cytotoxicity effect of insecticides evaluated by MTT assays was performed as previously described . Insecticides  used  in  this  study  included bioallethrin,  cypermethrin,  chlorpyrifos, deltamethrin, permethrin, propoxur and λ -cyhalothrin.  We  previously  used  cells infected  with  baculovirus  containing BacPak6 viral DNA as control in parallel with uninfected parental Sf9 cells, and both control cells showed same response to deltamethrin . In this study we thus used only uninfected Sf9 cells as control in MTT assays, and cells treated with DMSO solvent  alone  was  a  negative  control. CYP6P7- or CYP6AA3-expressing cells and control Sf9 cells were seeded at 2 x 10 5  cells per well in 24-well culture plates. Cells were allowed to  attach  to  wells  for  3  hours, insecticides ranging from 0.1 to 500 µM final concentrations were subsequently added into each well and cells were left exposing to each insecticide for 72 hr. When insecticides were used at higher concentration than 500 µM, they were precipitated in culture media, particularly for pyrethroids. Thus concentrations of pyrethroids over 500 µM were not evaluated in MTT assays. Following insecticide treatment, culture media were removed and each well was washed twice with Luckhoff's buffer (132 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.5 mM MgCl2, and 20 mM HEPES). Cell viability was determined using MTT assay. This  was  accomplished  by addition of 200 µl MTT solution (5 mg/ml in Luckhoff's buffer) and further subjected to 4-hour incubation at 28ºC. Subsequently, MTT solution was removed and DMSO was added to  dissolve  the  purple  formazan precipitate formed by activity of mitochondrial  enzymes  in  live  cells .  The  absorbance  of formazan product was measured at 540 nm using Multiskan EX microtiter plate reader (Thermo Labsystems, Finland). Cell viability upon incubation with each insecticide was expressed as percentage of viable cells relative to cells treated with DMSO solvent alone which was assigned as 100% viability. The value of 50% lethal concentration (LC 50 ) was evaluated from the plot of percentage of cell viability against different concentrations of  each  insecticide.  Higher  LC 50   value represents higher ability to survive toxicity of insecticides.
 In enzyme inhibition study, cells were coincubated with 100 µM deltamethrin and PBO (known P450 inhibitor) at concentrations of 0.1,  1  and  10  µM  (in  each  case  the  final concentration of DMSO in media was 1%). This range of PBO concentrations was less than LD50 value (25 µM) of PBO against Sf9 cells  pre-determined by MTT assays (data not shown). Inhibition of P450s by PBO was measured as cell survival against deltamethrin cytotoxicity in the presence of PBO, after normalization with that of cells treated with PBO only. Each MTT assay measuring cytotoxic  effect  of  insecticides  and
 measuring inhibitory effect by PBO was done in triplicate.
 ## In  vitro insecticide  metabolism  by CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3
 The in  vitro reconstitution assays in the presence of  insecticide  substrate  were performed as previously described . Briefly reconstitution reactions were carried out at 30ºC in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.2 in the presence of 10 pmol of either CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3 and was reconstituted with purified An. minimus NADPH-dependent  cytochrome  P450 reductase (P450 redox partner) in the ratio of 3:1, 80 µM of test insecticide, and NADPHregenerating  system.  Internal  standard (bioallethrin) and remaining of insecticide at each reaction time were analyzed by HPLC analysis and peaks were monitored by UV detection at 220 nm. The substrate peak area at each time point was calculated as percentage of remaining residual substrate compared to that of time zero which was assigned to be 100%. When bioallethrin was a substrate, deltamethrin was used as internal standard.  To  determine  metabolisms mediated by CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3, amount of  each  insecticide  consumed  at  each incubation time was calculated as percentage of depletion of each insecticide compared to the initial amount at time zero. Each of reconstitution experiments was performed in triplicate and internal standard was used for normalization.  Control  reactions  were performed by incubating reactions without NADPH-regenerating system, and reaction using microsome of uninfected Sf9 cells.
 ## Statistical analysis
 Data were statistically analyzed by GraphPad Prism version 5 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego,  CA)  using  ANOVA  with  Tukey's Multiple comparison test. Results with p &lt; 0.05  were  considered  to  be  significantly different.
 ## RESULTS
 In this study, cytotoxicity of insecticides was examined with Sf9 insect cells, with and without expression of CYP6P7 or CYP6AA3, using MTT cytotoxicity assays. CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 were expressed via baculovirusdirected  expression  system.  The  results revealed  higher  cell  viability  against cytotoxic effects of permethrin, cypermethrin and deltamethrin in CYP6P7- or CYP6AA3expressing cells than parental Sf9 cells for all given insecticide concentrations (Figure 1B-D). This is demonstrated by 5- to 13-fold higher LC50 values observed in CYP6P7- and CYP6AA3-expressing cells than control Sf9 parental cells. It could be noted that response to λ -cyhalothrin cytotoxicity was different between cells  expressing  CYP6P7  and CYP6AA3, as demonstrated by 3.7-fold higher LC50  value observed in CYP6AA3-expressing cells  than in CYP6P7-expressing cells and parental  Sf9  cells  (Figure  1E).  Upon treatment with bioallethrin, chlorpyrifos, and propoxur, percentage of cell viability of CYP6P7- and CYP6AA3-expressing cells and LC50 values were similar to control Sf9 cells (Figures 1A, F, and G).
 In order to determine whether increased cell survival against pyrethroid cytotoxicity found  in  cells  expressing  CYP6P7  or CYP6AA3 was due to activity of P450s, we assayed deltamethrin cytotoxicity in the presence of different concentrations of PBO, P450 inhibitor. Decrease of cell viability against  deltamethrin  cytotoxicity  was observed when cells expressing CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 were treated with increasing concentrations of PBO (Figure 2). Since PBO also possessed cytotoxic effect against Sf9 cells (see Materials and Methods section), thus percent cell viability of P450-expressing cells shown in Figure 2 was obtained after normalization with that of cells treated with PBO only. Percentage of cell survival against deltamethrin  of  CYP6P7-  or  CYP6AA3expressing cells in the presence of 10 µM PBO was significantly decreased, compared to those without PBO ( p&lt; 0.05). In Sf9 control cells, after normalization, percentage of cells surviving deltamethrin cytotoxicity remained similar throughout treatment with different PBO concentrations (Figure 2).
 Enzymatic activities  of  CYP6P7  and CYP6AA3  against  pyrethroid,  organophosphate, and carbamate insecticides were
 Figure 1. Viability of CYP6P7-expressing Sf9 cells ( z ), CYP6AA3-expressing Sf9 cells (  ) and parental Sf9 cells ( U )  upon incubation with various insecticides. Percentage of cell viability was measured using MTT cytotoxicity assays as described in Materials and Methods. Data are means ± S.D. of three replicated experiments. Asterisk (*) represents the value significantly different from control cells ( p &lt; 0.05, one-way ANOVA, Tukey's Multiple Comparison Test)
 
 Figure 2. Effect of deltamethrin on viability of cells expressing CYP6P7, CYP6AA3, and parental Sf9 cells in the presence of PBO. Cells were co-incubated with deltamethrin and PBO, and percentage of cell viability after normalization with that treated with PBO only was obtained as described in Materials and Methods. Data are means ± S.D. of three replicated experiments
 
 Figure 3. Plot of the time course of insecticide depletion mediated by CYP6P7 ( A ) and CYP6AA3 ( B ) enzymes using in vitro reconstitution assays, performed as described in Kaewpa et  al .  . Degradation of insecticide mediated by CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 was calculated as percentage of insecticide consumed in the reactions at each incubation time compared to time zero, after normalization with internal standard. Data are means ± S.D. of triplicate experiments
 
 investigated using CYP6P7- or CYP6AA3 reconstituted  with  their  redox  partner enzyme, the NADPH-dependent cytochrome P450 reductase. As shown in Figure 3 CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 showed enzymatic activities toward  permethrin,  cypermethrin  and deltamethrin, but no detectable activities were observed with bioallethrin, chlorpyrifos, and propoxur. Moreover, in contrast to CYP6AA3, CYP6P7 had undetectable enzyme activity in metabolizing λ -cyhalothrin. These results were thus in agreement with the ability of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 in protecting cells against cytotoxic effects of test insecticides.
 ## DISCUSSION
 The  results  of  this  study  showed  that expression of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 could help protecting insect Sf9 cells from cytotoxicity of several pyrethroids. Presence of PBO diminished CYP6P7- and CYP6AA3mediated cytoprotection of Sf9 cells against deltamethrin cytotoxicity, suggesting that cytoprotection  against  pyrethroids  was due to  CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 enzymes. Moreover, results from MTT cytotoxicity assays corresponded to those of in  vitro reconstitution enzymatic assays. In this study we detected cytotoxic effect of PBO against Sf9 cells, PBO toxicity has also been reported, as it  causes tumors and adverse effects in laboratory rodents .
 As shown in this study, Sf9 parental cells were susceptible to cytotoxicity of  test insecticides with LC 50 values less than 50 µM. Sensitivity of insect Sf9 cells to cytotoxic effects  of  compounds  such  as  fungal metabolites , pyridalyl insecticide   have  been reported. Thus susceptibility of Sf9 parental cells to insecticide cytotoxicity observed in the  present  study  is  advantageous  to determining capability of P450 enzymes in detoxifying insecticides. Capability of P450 in detoxifying cytotoxic xenochemicals were previously  reported  using  insect  cells expressing P450 enzyme via baculovirusdirected expression . Moreover Sf21 cells  expressing  human CYP1A1 were used to investigate toxicity of naphthalene .
 The results of this study revealed that CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 could function in metabolizing of permethrin, cypermethrin, and deltamethrin, however role in metabolisms of bioallethrin, chlorpyrifos and  propoxur  was  not  observed.  Thus abilities  of  CYP6P7  and  CYP6AA3  in detoxifying pyrethroids support their role in  conferring  deltamethrin  resistance  in An. minimus mosquito . A difference was noted in that while CYP6AA3 showed metabolic activity and cytoprotective activity against λ -cyhalothrin, these capabilities were not observed for
 CYP6P7.  The  results  thus  indicated differences  in  properties  of  these  two enzymes.
 A characteristic of P450s that has been noted is their variation in substrate specificity such as a single P450 could metabolize more than one substrate . In  vitro metabolisms of insecticides by insect P450s have been reported such as ability of CYP6P3 of An. gambiae in metabolizing more than one pyrethroid substrates including deltamethrin and permethrin ,  and  CYP6D1  of M.  domestica in metabolisms of deltamethrin and cypermethrin . In this study, results of both in situ  detoxification  assays  and in  vitro enzymatic assays demonstrated variation of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 activities toward different  pyrethroids  and  with  different specificities,  suggesting  their  abilities  to metabolize and detoxify several pyrethroid insecticides  in An.  minimus mosquito. Moreover, ability of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3 to detoxify pyrethroids observed in this study, although  without  co-expression  of An. minimus cytochrome  P450  reductase, indicated  that  the  NADPH-dependent cytochrome P450 reductase enzyme of Sf9 cells could help supporting activity of these mosquito P450s.
 In conclusion, the results obtained in this study elucidate the ability of CYP6P7 and CYP6AA3  in  detoxification  of  several pyrethroids and emphasize the possible role of  CYP6P7  and  CYP6AA3  enzymes  in conferring  pyrethroid  resistance  in An. minimus mosquito. A correlation of results from MTT cytotoxicity assays and in vitro enzymatic  activity  assays  emphasizes usefulness of employing P450-expressing Sf9 cells to pre-screen detoxification capability of P450s against cytotoxic insecticides using MTT cytotoxicity assays.
 Acknowledgements. We  thank  Sirikun Pethuan and Dr. Soamrutai Boonsuepsakul for  technical  support,  and  Dr.  Songklod Sarapusit for criticisms. This work is funded by Royal Golden Jubilee Program (RGJ); BIOTEC, National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA); and partly
 - supported by Thailand Research Fund (TRF) and Mahidol University.
 ## REFERENCES
 - Boonsuepsakul, S.,  Luepromchai,  E.  &amp; Rongnoparut, P. . Characterization of Anopheles  minimus CYP6AA3 expressed in recombinant baculovirus system. Archives of Insect Biochemistry and Physiology 69 : 13-21.
- Bortel,  W.V.,  Trung,  H.D.,  Thuan,  L.K., Sochantha, T., Socheat, D., Sumrandee, C., Baimai, V., Keokenchanh, K., Samlane, P., Roelants, P., Denis, L., Verhaeghen, K., Obsomer, V. &amp; Coosemans, M. . The insecticide resistance status of malaria vectors in the Mekong region. Malaria Journal 7 : 102.
- Chareonviriyaphap, T.,  Aum-aung,  B.  &amp; Ratanatham, S. . Current insecticide  resistance  patterns  in mosquito vectors in Thailand. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Health 30 : 184-194.
- Chareonviriyaphap, T., Rongnoparut, P., Chantarumporn, P. &amp; Bangs, M.J. . Biochemical detection of pyrethroid resistance mechanisms in Anopheles minimus in Thailand. Journal of Vector Ecology 28 : 108-116.
- Coleman,  M.  &amp;  Hemingway,  J.  . Insecticide resistance monitoring and evaluation  in  disease  transmitting mosquitoes. Journal of Pesticide Science 32 : 69-76.
- Cuamba, N., Morgan, J.C., Irving, H., Steven, A. &amp; Wondji, C.S. . High level of pyrethroid resistance in an Anopheles funestus population  of  the  Chokwe district  in  Mozambique. PLoS ONE 5 : e11010.
- Djouaka, R.F., Bakare, A.A., Coulibaly, O.N., Akogbeto, M.C., Ranson, H., Hemingway, J. &amp; Strode, C. . Expression of the cytochrome P450s, CYP6P3 and CYP6M2 are  significantly  elevated  in  multiple pyrethroid  resistant  populations  of Anopheles gambiae s.s.  from  Southern Benin and Nigeria. BMC genomics 9 : 538.
- Feyereisen, R. . Insect P450 enzymes. Annual Review of Entomology 44 : 507533.
- Fornelli,  F.,  Minervini,  F.  &amp;  Logrieco,  A. .  Cytotoxicity  of  fungal  metabolites  to  lepidopteran  ( Spodoptera frugiperda )  cell  line  (Sf-9). Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 85: 74-79.
- Gassner, B., Wãthrich, A., Scholtysik, G. &amp; Solioz,  M.  .  The  pyrethroids permethrin and cyhalothrin are potent inhibitors of the mitochondrial complex I. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 281 :  855860.
- Grant, D.F., Greene, J.F., Pinot, F., Borhan, B., Moghaddam, M.F., Hummock, B.D., McCutchen, B., Ohkawa, H., Luo, G. &amp; Guenthner, T.M. . Development of an in situ toxicity  assay system using recombinant baculoviruses. Biochemical Pharmacology 51 : 503-515.
- Greene,  J.F.,  Zheng,  J.,  Grant,  D.F.  &amp; Hammock, B.D. . Cytotoxicity of 1,2-epoxynaphthalene is correlated with protein binding and in situ glutathione depletion  in  cytochrome  P4501A1 expressing Sf-21 cells. Toxicological Sciences 53 : 352-360.
- Kaewpa, D., Boonsuepsakul, S. &amp; Rongnoparut, P.  .  Functional expression  of  mosquito  NADPHcytochrome P450 reductase in Escherichia coli . Journal of Economic Entomology 100 : 946-953.
- Maran, E., Fernández-FranŸon, M., Font, G. &amp; Ruiz, M.J. . Effects of aldicarb and propoxur on cytotoxicity  and  lipid peroxidation in CHO-K1 cells. Food and Chemical Toxicology 48 : 1592-1596.
- Matowo, J., Kulkarni, M.A., Mosha, F.W., Oxborough, R.M., Kitau, J.A., Tenu, F. &amp; Rowland, M. . Biochemical basis of permethrin resistance in Anopheles arabiensis from  Lower Moshi, northeastern Tanzania. Malaria Journal 9 : 193.
- Mosmann, T. . Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. Journal of lmmunological Methods 65 : 55-63.
 - Müller, P., Warr, E., Stevenson, B.J., Pignatelli, P.M., Morgan, J.C., Steven, A., Yawson, A.E., Mitchell, S.N.,  Ranson,  H., Hemingway, J., Paine, M.J.I. &amp; Donnelly, M.J.  .  Field-caught  permethrinresistant Anopheles  gambiae overexpress CYP6P3, a P450 that metabolises pyrethroids. PLoS Genetics 4 : e1000286.
- Munhenga, G., Masendu, H.T., Brooke, B.D., Hunt, R.H. &amp; Koekemoer, L.K. . Pyrethroid  resistance  in  the  major malaria vector Anopheles arabiensis from Gwave, a malaria-endemic area in Zimbabwe. Malaria Journal 7 : 247.
- Naravaneni, R. &amp; Jamil, K. . Evaluation of  cytogenetic  effects  of  lambdacyhalothrin  on  human  lymphocytes. Journal of Biochemical and Molecular Toxicology 19 : 304-310.
- Okamiya, H., Mitsumori, K., Onodera, H., Ito, S.,  Imazawa,  T.,  Yasuhara,  K.  &amp; Takahashi, M. . Mechanistic study on  liver  tumor  promoting  effects  of piperonyl butoxide in rats. Archives of Toxicology 72 : 744-750.
- Omura, T. &amp; Sato, R. . The carbon monoxide-biding  pigment  of  liver microsome I. Evidence for its hemoprotein nature. Journal of Biological Chemistry 239 : 2370-2378.
- Patel, S., Bajpayee, M., Pandey, A.K., Parmar, D. &amp; Dhawan, A. . In vitro induction of cytotoxicity and DNA strand breaks in CHO cells exposed to cypermethrin, pendimethalin and dichlorvos. Toxicology In Vitro 21 : 1409-1418.
- Rodpradit, P., Boonsuepsakul, S., Chareonviriyaphap, T., Bangs, M.J. &amp; Rongnoparut, P. . Cytochrome P450  genes:  molecular  cloning  and overexpression in a pyrethroid-resistant strain of Anopheles minimus mosquito. Journal  of  the  American  Mosquito Control Association 21 : 71-79.
- Rongnoparut,  P.,  Boonsuepsakul,  S., Chareonviriyaphap, T. &amp; Thanomsing, N. .  Cloning  of  cytochrome P450, CYP6P5 , and CYP6AA2 from Anopheles minimus resistant  to  deltamethrin . Journal of Vector Ecology 28 : 150-158.
- Saito, S., Sakamoto, N. &amp; Umeda, K. . Effects of pyridalyl, a novel insecticidal - agent, on cultured Sf9 cells. Journal of Pesticide Science 30 : 17-21.
- Schmuck, G. &amp; Mihail, F. . Effects of the  carbamates  fenoxycarb,  propamocarb and propoxur on energy supply, glucose utilization  and  SH-groups  in neurons. Archives of Toxicology 78 : 330337.
- Scott, J.G. . Cytochromes P450 and insecticide  resistance. Insect  Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 29 : 757-777.
- Swann, J.M., Schultz, T.W. &amp; Kennedy, J.R. .  The  effects  of  the  organophosphorous insecticides Dursban TM and Lorsban TM  on the ciliated epithelium of the frog palate in vitro . Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 30 : 188-194.
- Takahashi, O., Oishi, S., Fujitani, T., Tanaka, T.  &amp;  Yoneyama,  M.  .  Chronic toxicity studies of piperonyl butoxide in CD-1 mice: Induction of hepatocellular carcinoma. Toxicology 124 : 95-103.
- Tomita, T., Liu, N., Smith, F.F., Sridhar, P. &amp; Scott, J.G. . Molecular mechanisms  involved  in  increased expression  of  a  cytochrome  P450 responsible for pyrethroid resistance in the housefly, Musca domestica . Insect Molecular Biology 4 :  135-140.
- Villarini,  M.,  Moretti,  M.,  Pasquini,  R., Scassellati-Sforzolini, G., Fatigoni, C., Marcarelli, M., Monarca, S. &amp; Rodríguez, A.V. . In vitro genotoxic effects of the insecticide deltamethrin in human peripheral  blood  leukocytes:  DNA damage ('comet' assay) in relation to the induction of sister-chromatid exchanges and micronuclei. Toxicology 130 :  129139.
- Wheelock, G.D. &amp; Scott, J.G. . The role of  cytochrome P450lpr in deltamethrin metabolism by pyrethroid-resistant and susceptible  strains  of  house  flies. Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology 43 : 67-77.
- Zhang, M. &amp; Scott, J.G. . Cytochrome b5 is essential for cytochrome P450 6D1mediated cypermethrin resistance in LPR house flies. Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology 55 : 150-156.