## Research Article

## A Human iPSC-Based In Vitro Neural Network Formation Assay to Investigate Neurodevelopmental Toxicity of Pesticides

Kristina Bartmann 1,2 , Farina Bendt 1 , Arif Dönmez 1,2 , Daniel Haag 3 , H. Eike Keßel 1 , Stefan Masjosthusmann 1 , Christopher Noel 3 , Ji Wu 3 , Peng Zhou 3  and Ellen Fritsche 1,2,4

1 IUF - Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, Duesseldorf, Germany;  2 DNTOX GmbH, Duesseldorf, Germany;  3 NeuCyte Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA;  4 Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany

## Abstract

Proper brain development is based on the orchestration of key neurodevelopmental processes (KNDP), including the formation and function of neural networks. If at least one KNDP is affected by a chemical, an adverse outcome is expected. To enable a higher testing throughput than the guideline animal experiments, a developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) in vitro testing battery (DNT IVB) comprising a variety of assays that model several KNDPs was set up. Gap analysis revealed the need for a human-based assay to assess neural network formation and function (NNF). Therefore, we established the human NNF (hNNF) assay. A co-culture comprised of human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived excitatory and inhibitory neurons as well as primary human astroglia was differentiated for 35 days on microelectrode arrays (MEA), and spontaneous electrical activity, together with cytotoxicity, was assessed on a weekly basis after washout of the compounds 24 h prior to measurements. In addition to the characterization of the test system, the assay was challenged with 28 compounds, mainly pesticides, identifying their DNT potential by evaluation of specific spike-, burst-, and network parameters. This approach confirmed the suitability of the assay for screening environmental chemicals. Comparison of benchmark concentrations (BMC) with an NNF in vitro assay (rNNF) based on primary rat cortical cells revealed differences in sensitivity. Together with the successful implementation of hNNF data into a postulated stressor-specific adverse outcome pathway (AOP) network associated with a plausible molecular initiating event for deltamethrin, this study suggests the hNNF assay as a useful complement to the DNT IVB.

## 1  Introduction

The developing central nervous system is known to be more sensitive to exposure to toxic agents than the adult equivalent (Rodier, 1995). There is evidence that environmental chemicals contribute to neurodevelopmental disorders in children such as autism spectrum disorder, mental retardation, and cerebral palsy (NRC, 2000; Grandjean and Landrigan, 2006; Kuehn, 2010; Sagiv et al., 2010; Bennett et al., 2016).

Pesticides  belong  to  one  compound  class  that  is  demonstrably associated with causing developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) (Bjørling-Poulsen et al., 2008). Today, only 35 of the 485 pesticides currently approved in the EU have been tested in DNT studies  (Ockleford et al., 2018). The reason for this lack of testing, which generally applies to all chemicals (Goldman and Koduru,

Received June 3, 2022; Accepted April 24, 2023; Epub May 3, 2023; © The Authors, 2023.

ALTEX 40(3), 452-470. doi:10.14573/altex.2206031

Correspondence: Ellen Fritsche, PhD IUF-Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine Auf'm Hennekamp 50 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany (ellen.fritsche@iuf-duesseldorf.de)

2000; Crofton et al., 2012), lies in the current DNT in vivo testing guidelines, i.e., the OECD 426 (OECD, 2007) and EPA 870.6300 (U.S. EPA, 1998) guidelines. Their high resource intensity regarding time, money, and animals is a reason for the limited throughput  of  these  studies  (Smirnova  et  al.,  2014).  Furthermore,  high variability and low reproducibility of in vivo experiments, as well as species differences, increase the uncertainty of in vivo guideline studies for DNT testing (Tsuji and Crofton, 2012; Terron and Bennekou, 2018; Sachana et al., 2019; Paparella et al., 2020).

In the last years, scientists from academia, industry, and regulatory authorities across the world agreed on the need for a standardized in vitro testing strategy, aiming for cheaper and faster generation of additional data for DNT hazard assessment (EFSA, 2013; Crofton et al., 2014; Bal-Price et al., 2015, 2018; Fritsche et al., 2017, 2018a,b). Following this consensus, a DNT in vitro battery

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution  4.0  International  license  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is appropriately cited.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(IVB) was compiled, which includes various DNT test methods covering  different  neurodevelopmental  processes,  so-called  key events (KEs), and developmental stages to approximate the complexity of human brain development (Fritsche, 2017; Fritsche et al., 2017; Bal-Price et al., 2018). Within this DNT IVB, neurodevelopment is described by in vitro assays covering the following KEs:  human  neural  progenitor  cell  (hNPC)  proliferation  (Baumann et al., 2014, 2015; Harrill et al., 2018; Nimtz et al., 2019; Masjosthusmann  et  al.,  2020;  Koch  et  al.,  2022)  and  apoptosis (Druwe et al., 2015; Harrill et al., 2018), cell migration (Baumann et al., 2015, 2016; Nyffeler et al., 2017; Schmuck et al., 2017; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020; Koch et al., 2022), hNPC-neuronal (Baumann et al., 2015; Schmuck et al., 2017; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020; Koch et al., 2022) and oligodendrocyte differentiation (Fritsche et al., 2015; Dach et al., 2017; Schmuck et al., 2017; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020; Klose et al., 2021; Koch et al., 2022), neurite outgrowth ( human: Harrill et al., 2010, 2018; Krug et al., 2013; Hoelting et al., 2016; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020; Koch et al., 2022; rat: Harrill et al., 2013, 2018) as well as neuronal maturation and synaptogenesis ( rat: Harrill et al., 2011, 2018).

Another  crucial  key  neurodevelopmental  process  represented within the DNT IVB is the formation and function of neural networks, since nervous system development requires functional networks consisting of different types of neurons and glial cells (Brown et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017; Shafer, 2019). Furthermore, certain brain disorders, like autism spectrum disorder, Alzheimer's  and  Parkinson's  disease,  are  associated  with  dysfunctional neural synchronization (Uhlhaas and Singer, 2006). Important tools to study electrophysiology of such neural networks are microelectrode  arrays  (MEA),  which  record  extracellular  local field potentials on multiple electrodes at different locations of the network and provide information on electrical activity, firing patterns, and synchronicity of the neural networks (Johnstone et al., 2010). So far, DNT in vitro testing for synaptogenesis and neuronal activity is mainly performed in assays based on rat primary cortical cells (Brown et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017). The use of a human cell model to assess this endpoint has been identified as a gap in the current DNT IVB because the potential for species-specific features is still unknown (Crofton and Mundy, 2021).

The  introduction  of  human  induced  pluripotent  stem  cells (hiPSC)  (Takahashi  et  al.,  2007)  has  extensively  advanced  the field  of  biomedical  sciences  including  testing  for  DNT.  It  has been shown that hiPSC-derived neural networks growing directly on MEAs exhibit spontaneous neuronal activity with organized spiking and bursting patterns (Odawara et al., 2016; Ishii et al., 2017; Nimtz et al., 2020; Tukker et al., 2020a; Bartmann et al., 2021), which can be modulated with known neurotoxicants and

1  doi:10.14573/altex.2206031s1

## Abbreviations

AOP, adverse outcome pathway; AUC, area under the curve; AUNCC, area under normalized cross-correlation; BIC, bicuculline; Bis-I, bisindolylmaleimide I; BMC, benchmark concentration; BMR, benchmark response; CI, confidence interval; COV, coefficient of variation; CNQX, cyanquixaline; DIV, days in vitro ; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; DNT, developmental neurotoxicity; excitatory:inhibitory (ex:inh); FBS, fetal bovine serum; FPKM, fragments per kilobase per million; hiPSC, human induced pluripotent stem cells; iN, induced neuronal cells; iN:glia, induced neuronal and glial cells; MSE, most sensitive endpoint; LG, ligand-gated; MIE, molecular initiating event; NPC, neural progenitor cell; IVB, in vitro battery; KE, key event; KNDP, key neurodevelopmental process; MEA, microelectrode array; MoA, mode of action; NNF, neural network formation and function; PKC, protein kinase C; VG, voltage-gated drugs (Odawara et al., 2018; Nimtz et al., 2020; Tukker et al., 2020b). The neural induction of hiPSCs towards functional neuronal cultures comes with many advantages, especially with regard to disease modelling, but bears the issue of high variability between batches and cell lines. This variability is mostly due to the fact that every neural network differentiates into a variable number of neuronal subtypes. In addition, the generation of sufficiently active networks takes weeks to months (Hofrichter et al., 2017; Hyvärinen et al., 2019). The use of commercially available hiPSC-derived  neurons  with  quality-  and  cell  ratio-controlled, reproducible cells provided in large quantities circumvents these problems (Little et al., 2019).

In this study we present the establishment of a human neural network formation (hNNF) assay based on a commercially available kit, which consists of hiPSC-derived excitatory and inhibitory  neurons  and  primary  astroglia  (SynFire,  NeuCyte,  USA). Pharmacological modulation confirmed the functionality of both neuronal subtypes, and chronic treatment over 35 days revealed the ability of the cell model to detect alterations by bisindolylmaleimide I (Bis-I) via a known mode of action (MoA). The assay was challenged with a test set of 28 substances and displayed compound-specific effects on network development.

## 2  Materials and methods

## Compounds

In the present study, 28 substances with different concerns regarding their DNT potential were tested. The compounds are part of a training set used for the current DNT in vitro battery (Blum et al., 2022; Carstens et al., 2022). More information on compound selection  can  be  found  in  Masjosthusmann  et  al.  (2020). As  an assay  negative  control,  acetaminophen  was  included  in  the  test set. The protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor Bis-I was used as an assay  positive  control,  together  with  bicuculline  (BIC)  and  cyanquixaline  (6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione;  CNQX)  for acute pharmacological treatment of networks. Bis-I is known to decrease neurite outgrowth and firing/bursting rates of rat neural networks  (Harrill  et  al.,  2011;  Robinette  et  al.,  2011),  whereas BIC and CNQX are GABAergic and glutamatergic receptor inhibitors,  respectively.  Compounds  were  dissolved  in  dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or water to a stock concentration of 20 mM with exception of rotenone (100 mM), BIC (15 mM), and CNQX (30 mM). Applied concentrations ranged from 0.027 to 20 µM and 0.0004 to 0.3 µM for rotenone. Bis-I was applied at 5 µM, BIC at 3 µM, and CNQX at 30 µM. CAS registry numbers, suppliers, and further information are collected in Table S1 1 .

一

<!-- image -->

Fig. 1: Experimental setup of the human NNF assay

<!-- image -->

A co-culture of hiPSC-derived excitatory and inhibitory neurons and primary astroglia (NeuCyte, USA) was plated in a defined cell type ratio on 48-well MEA plates at DIV 0. Cultures were allowed to mature for 7 days before exposure to the test compounds. 24 h before the weekly recording of spontaneous electrical network activity on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35 a washout of the respective compounds was performed. Additionally, cytotoxicity was assessed every week on DIV 10, 17, 24, and 31 three days after dosing. Created with BioRender.com.

## Cell culture

SynFire glutamatergic neurons (Lot#000172 and 000131), SynFire GABAergic neurons (Lot#000172 and 000131), and SynFire  astrocytes  (Lot#13029-050  and  00190820;  all  from  NeuCyte, USA) were thawed and cultured according to the manufacturer's protocol. In short, all three cell types were thawed and resuspended in a defined ratio in supplemented seeding medium (NeuCyte), resulting in a co-culture consisting of induced neuronal (iN) and glial cells (iN:glia). Cells were seeded at a density of 270 x 10 3  cells/well (140 x 10 3  glutamatergic neurons, 60 x 10 3 GABAergic neurons, 70 x 10 3  astrocytes) on 48 well MEA plates (Axion M768-KAP-48) pre-coated with 0.1% polyethyleneimine and 20 µg/mL mouse laminin. This approach resulted in a cell type ratio of 52% glutamatergic neurons, 22% GABAergic neurons, and 26% astroglia. The seeding was performed in a 50 µL droplet (270 x 10 3  cells/droplet) of supplemented seeding medium (NeuCyte) per well. After cells were allowed to adhere for 24 h, each well was filled with 250 µL supplemented short-term medium (NeuCyte). At days in vitro (DIV) 3 and 5, cells were fed by replacing half of the medium with supplemented short-term medium. From DIV 7 onwards, medium was gradually changed to  supplemented  long-term  medium  (NeuCyte)  by  replacing half of the medium on DIV 7 and 10 until the medium was completely replaced at DIV 13 (washout). The short-term medium is supplemented with a substance that reduces the proliferation of astroglia.

Following the same plating procedure and seeding density, 20 wells of a pre-coated 96-well flat bottom plate (Greiner) were prepared for weekly cytotoxicity assessments.

## Experimental design

Following the first recording of spontaneous electrical network activity at DIV 7, cells were exposed to the respective test compound  by  exchanging  half  of  the  medium  with  supplemented long-term  medium  containing  double-concentrated  compound. Half medium changes with the compounds were conducted at DIV 10, 17, 24, and 31. The removed medium was used for cytotoxicity assessment described below. 24 h before weekly recordings at DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35, a washout with PBS was performed  prior  to  replacing  the  medium  with  chemical-free

<!-- image -->

supplemented  long-term  medium  to  minimize  acute  substance effects  during  MEA  recordings.  For  this  purpose,  the  medium was completely removed and replaced by adding 300 µL prewarmed PBS. After incubation for 30 min (37°C, 5% CO2), PBS was replaced by freshly supplemented long-term medium. After recording, the medium was again replaced with long-term medium containing the test compound. Two compounds were tested per 48-well MEA plate including solvent and endpoint-specific controls.  Each  independent  experiment  (biological  replicate) results from a different thawing procedure done on a different day and comprises three technical replicates (replicate wells, see Fig. S1 1 ). In this study, we followed a two-step testing paradigm, where each compound was initially tested twice independently. If  the  two  independent  experiments  showed  the  same  results, e.g., no effect, no additional experiment was conducted. In case of conflicting outcomes, a third experiment was performed. The experimental setup is summarized in Figure 1.

## MEA recording

Spontaneous electrical network activity on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35 was recorded with the Axion Maestro Pro system, a 768-channel amplifier, and AxIS software version 1.5.3 or later (Axion Biosystems, Atlanta, USA). The recording procedure of the electrical network activity was composed of a 15-min equilibration period and two consecutive measurements of 15 min each, whereas only the last 15-min recording was used for further analysis. The last pipetting (washout) was performed 24 h prior to the measurement. For  acute  response  measurements  (CNQX, BIC), pipetting was performed right before the measurement, with a 5-min wash-in phase, and only the first 15 min recording was analyzed. All recordings were conducted at 37°C and 5% CO2. The activity was measured  using  a  gain  of  1000x  and  a  sampling  frequency  of 12.5 kHz. A Butterworth band-pass filter was used (200-3000 Hz) prior to spike detection (threshold of 6x root mean square [RMS] noise on each electrode) via the AxIS adaptive spike detector. An active electrode was defined as ≥ 5 spikes/min.

## Cytotoxicity assessment

Cytotoxicity  was  assessed  every  week  and  three  days  after re-dosing (at DIV 10, 17, 24, and 31) using the CytoTox-ONE Homogeneous  Membrane  Integrity  Assay,  which  is  based  on measurement  of  lactate  dehydrogenase  (LDH)  release,  according  to  the  manufacturer's  instructions  (#G7891,  Promega, Madison, United States). 50 µL medium from each well was removed, transferred to a 96-well plate (Sarstedt), and 50 µL CytoTox-ONE reagent was added. 30 min prior to the cytotoxicity assay, three wells of the lysis plate were treated with 10% Triton-X 100, and the supernatant was used as lysis positive control. As a background control, 50 µL of supplemented long-term medium was incubated with the same volume of CytoTox-ONE reagent. Following 2 h of incubation at room temperature, the fluorescence was detected with a Tecan infinite M200 Pro reader (ex: 540 nm; em: 590 nm).

2 https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/drc/index.html

## Data analyses

After recording with the AxIS software, recordings were re-recorded using the same software, resulting in .spk files. For single electrode burst detection, the inter-spike interval threshold algorithm was used with a maximum inter-spike interval of 100 ms with at least five spikes. Additionally, network bursts were detected using the Axion Neural Metric Tool and the envelope algorithm with a threshold factor of 1.5, a minimum inter-burst interval of 100 ms, and 60% active electrodes. The synchrony window was set to 20 ms. This resulted in 72 network parameters for five time points and seven concentrations. As a manual evaluation of all 72 parameters was not possible, an automated evaluation workflow that calculates the trapezoidal area under the  curve  (AUC)  and  benchmark  concentrations  (BMC)  was set up. AUC was calculated as previously described by Brown and colleagues (Brown et al., 2016). Consecutively, spline interpolations with degree 1 polynomials for the data points given for conditions were made for each endpoint in each plate. If the response for an endpoint for the DIV 7 measurement was missing, e.g., because of absent bursting activity in an active well, it  was set using random sampling throughout overall available first DIV responses for that endpoint on the same plate when at least 50% of these responses were available. In the final pre-processing step, a common time duration, related to one DIV, with available responses in the resulting data was determined for each endpoint and experiment. Finally, the AUC from these common durations was determined.

The pesticide data presented in this paper were derived from two to three individual experiments per compound as stated in Table S1 1 . The data was normalized to the median solvent control and re-normalized to the starting point of a concentration-response  curve  generated  with  the  R  package  drc 2   as  described below. For cytotoxicity data, a different normalization was used: The normalized cytotoxicity response equaled the lysis control (LC) median minus the response of the respective concentration divided by the lysis control median minus the solvent control (SC) median:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BMCs (BMC50 and BMC50ind) with their upper and lower confidence intervals (CI) were calculated based on the R package drc 2 . Linear, sigmoidal, monotonic, and non-monotonic models were run with the concentration-response data of each endpoint, and Akaike's information criteria were used to determine the best fit. Endpoints were classified as DNT-specific if CIs of the BMCs calculated for the DNT-specific endpoint did not overlap with the cytotoxicity endpoint. If the overlap exceeded 10%, the endpoint was classified as unspecific. Statistical significance was calculated  using  GraphPad  Prism  8.2.1  and  one-way ANOVA  with Dunnett's post-hoc tests or two-tailed Student's t-tests (p ≤ 0.05 was termed significant).

## RNA-Seq

NeuCyte's iPSC-derived glutamatergic and GABAergic-induced neurons and human astrocytes were seeded to form iN:glia co-culture. Cells were harvested on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35, four biological replicates per time point. RNA-Seq was performed by Novogene (CA, USA). Total RNA was extracted using the Qiagen RNA Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Germany). For library preparation, NEBNext ®  Ultra™ II RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina ®  was used  (New  England  Biolabs,  MA,  USA).  For  sequencing,  NovaSeq 6000 was used, utilizing paired-end 150 bp read length. Downstream data analysis was performed using a combination of programs. Alignments were parsed using STAR program. Reads were  aligned  to  the  reference  genome  GRCh37  using  STAR (v2.S). STAR counted number of reads per gene while mapping. The counts coincide with those produced by HTseq-count with default  parameters.  Then  fragments  per  kilobase  per  million mapped reads (FPKM) of each gene were calculated based on the length of the gene and read counts mapped to this gene.

## Immunostainings

SynFire iN:glia co-cultures were validated by immunostaining of  markers  including:  guinea  pig  anti-MAP2  (1:200,  Synaptic Systems, 188 004), rabbit anti-synapsin1 (1:200, Synaptic Systems, 106 008), rabbit anti-VGLUT2 (1:200, Synaptic Systems, 135 403), rabbit anti-VGAT (1:200, Synaptic Systems, 131 011), rabbit anti-GFAP (1:250, Abcam, ab4674). Secondary antibodies were conjugated to AlexaFluor647 (1:200, Invitrogen) and AlexaFluor488 (1:200, Invitrogen).

On DIV 35, the co-cultures were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich) at room temperature for 15 min, washed three times with PBS (PAN Biotech), and then incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution (5% goat serum (Sigma Aldrich) + 0.2% Triton X-100 (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS). On the second day, co-cultures were washed three times with PBS and then incubated with secondary antibodies diluted in blocking solution with 1% Hoechst 33258 (1:100, Merck). After washing three times with PBS, fluorescence imaging was performed using an automated microscope system for high-content imaging (CellInsight CX7 LZR Platform, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

## 3  Results

Characterization of an MEA-based assay for network formation The  present  study  describes  the  establishment  and  characterization of a human iPSC-based NNF assay. The assay was challenged with 27 pesticides and acetaminophen as a negative control.  Cells  of  a  defined  cell  type  ratio  (52% glutamatergic neurons, 22% GABAergic neurons, 26% astrocytes) were seeded as a monolayer culture on each MEA well containing 16 electrodes.

Figure 2 illustrates immunocytochemical staining of the neural networks on DIV 35 as well as their characteristics at different

<!-- image -->

maturation time points (DIV 7-35) using transcriptome profiling (RNA-Seq). DIV 35 staining (Fig. 2A) showed a strong presence of MAP2-positive neurons and a lower amount of NeuN ( RBFOX3 ), indicating a high maturation level of the networks. The glial marker GFAP was strongly expressed, and the co-cultures  were  positive  for  the  pre-synaptic  marker  synapsin,  the vesicular GABA transporter vGAT, and the vesicular glutamate transporter vGLUT.

These characteristics were confirmed by RNA sequencing of co-cultures at different time points (Fig. 2B). The maturation of neurons within the system was verified by a high expression of neuronal maturation markers, e.g., MAP2 (Maccioni and Cambiazo,  1995), DLG4 ,  and SYP (Glantz  et  al.,  2007),  compared to  genes coding for immature neurons, e.g., NEUROD1 (Seki, 2002). Additionally,  the  high  expression  of GFAP and AQP4 , compared to S100B , characterizes the mature glial system (Holst et al., 2019). Also, genes coding for GABA and AMPA receptors and glutamate transporters showed expression at DIV 7 with gradations  within  their  subtypes  (e.g., SLC1A2 vs. SLC1A3 ). Voltage- (VG) and ligand-gated (LG) ion channels were enriched in the culture. In comparison to VG- and LG-calcium channels, VG-sodium  channels  were  more  highly  expressed.  Moreover, expression  of  transcripts  coding  for  dopaminergic,  cholinergic (nicotinic  and  muscarinic),  and  NMDA  receptors  (NMDAR) were  detected.  Especially CHRNA3 (Karlin,  2002)  and DRD2 (Missale  et  al.,  1998)  expression  was  enhanced  at  DIV  7  and decreased  with  increasing  maturation  of  the  networks.  The higher expression of SLC12A5 ( KCC2 )  compared to SLC12A2 ( NKCC1 ) at DIV 14 indicates that the cells had passed the GABA switch, which marks the shift from pre-mature excitatory to mature inhibitory GABAergic neurons (Leonzino et al., 2016). Taken together, the gene expression data show that the neural networks develop over time and express a broad variety of genes related to neuronal and glial function, which is a prerequisite for neural network function.

MEA are important tools to study network electrophysiology. MEA recordings provide high-content data based on the recording of extracellular action potentials, so-called spikes, which are the basic unit of activity of a neural network. During the development of a network, spikes can group into bursts and can synchronize  their  activity,  resulting  in  network  bursts.  To  confirm  the contribution  of  functional  GABAergic  and  glutamatergic  neurons in the development of the networks, we performed an acute pharmacological modulation of neural networks on DIV 21 by challenging the neuronal subtypes with the receptor antagonists BIC and CNQX. BIC is a well-studied GABAA receptor antagonist, which primarily competitively inhibits binding of GABA to its receptors. As a consequence, BIC reduces GABA-activated conductance by reducing channel opening times as well as opening frequency, resulting in an increased firing rate (Macdonald et al., 1989; Johnston, 2013; Mack et al., 2014). In comparison, CNQX primarily antagonizes AMPA-type glutamate receptors and thereby suppresses spontaneous excitatory glutamatergic synap-

一

A

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2: Immunocytochemical staining and gene expression profiles of SynFire neuronal/ glial co-cultures at different maturation time points

<!-- image -->

(A) Immunocytochemical staining of different neuronal and glial markers of differentiated co-cultures on DIV 35. Nuclei were stained with Hoechst (blue) together with MAP2 (green) and either GFAP, synapsin1, vGAT or vGlut, respectively (red). Scale bar = 50 µm. (B) RNA-Seq data was used to generate gene expression profiles on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35. Values are presented as fragments per kilobase per million mapped reads (FPKM). Cut-off for likely expression: 2.78 FPKM. VG, voltage-gated; LG, ligand-gated; Ca, calcium; Na, sodium

一

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3: Acute pharmacological modulation of DIV 21 neural network activity

<!-- image -->

Untreated DIV 21 neural networks (baseline, BL) were exposed to 3 µM bicuculline (BIC) or 30 µM cyanquixaline (6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione; CNQX), respectively. (A, B) 100-s spike raster plots reveal the effects of 3 µM BIC or 30 µM CNQX on DIV 21 neural networks. Spikes are represented as black bars, bursts as blue bars. Pink boxes indicate network bursts. (C-F) 3 µM BIC enhanced neural network activity as indicated by the increase in different network parameters compared to the baseline. (G-J) 30 µM CNQX decreased neural network activity as measured by the decrease in different network parameters. Data are represented as violin plot distributions of 9 (C-F) or 8 (G-J) independent experiments. Dotted lines represent quartiles of distribution, and red bars represent the median. Statistical significance was calculated using two-tailed Student's t-tests. A p-value below 0.05 was termed significant. *, significant compared to the respective BL.

tic  activity  (Neuman et al., 1988; Odawara et al., 2016). After baseline recording at DIV 21, cells were exposed to the respective modulator, and the electrical activity was measured. Exposure to 3 µM BIC increased general electrical activity, especially synchronous bursting (Fig. 3A, pink boxes), whereas 30 µM CNQX led to a loss of organized activity, as illustrated by representative 100-s spike raster plots (Fig. 3A,B). For additional quality control of the test method, acute treatments with the two described modulators were included in every assay run. Violin plots  for  each  compound  and  four  different  network  parameters (Fig. 3C-F) illustrate the distribution of these data, and the median of 8-9 independent experiments (median of 3 technical replicates each) reveals the effect of both receptor antagonists.

3 µM BIC significantly enhanced the mean firing rate and burst duration.  Consistent  with  the  spike  raster  plots,  BIC  doubled the percentage of overall spikes contributing to network bursts from 40% to 80% ('Network burst percentage', Fig. 3E) and increased the area under normalized cross-correlation ('AUNCC', Fig. 3F), which describes the synchronicity of the network. In contrast, CNQX inhibited the overall activity and organization of the networks. Especially burst duration and synchronicity were impaired with a low degree of variation (Fig. 3H,J).

As already indicated by gene expression data (Fig. 2), electrophysiological measurements over time confirmed maturation of the neural networks based on their display of specific firing patterns like organized spiking and synchronicity at later stages of differen-

一

A

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

、

Fig. 4: Neural network development on 48-well microelectrode arrays (MEA) and its inhibition by bisindolylmaleimide I (Bis-I)

(A) Representative 120 s spike raster plots referring to DIV 7 to 35. Spikes are represented as black bars, bursts as blue bars. Pink boxes indicate network bursts. (B-E) Dot plots showing the distribution of untreated (solvent control; 0.1% DMSO) network activities from DIV 7 to 35 over four network parameters (mean firing rate, burst duration, network burst percentage, and area under normalized crosscorrelation (AUNCC)). Single dots represent the median of three replicates of each experiment. The red bar defines the median over all plates (n = 41). (F-I) Starting at DIV 7, networks were treated with increasing concentrations (0.12; 0.37; 1.11; 3.33 and 10 µM) of the PKC inhibitor Bis-I. Different network parameters (mean firing rate, number of active electrodes, network burst percentage, area under normalized cross-correlation (AUNCC)) reflect the impairment of Bis-I on neural network development over 35 days of differentiation. Data are shown as mean ± SD of four wells. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA. A p-value below 0.05 was termed significant. *, significant compared to the earliest DIV.

tiation (Fig. 3A). Representative spike raster plots illustrate these features over the 35-day development of the networks (Fig. 4A). At DIV 7, spikes (black bars) were the sole form of activity, whereas at DIV 14, bursts (blue bars) started to form on single electrodes. Along with the increase in bursting activity and the emergence of a synchronous network starting on DIV 21, the number of spikes between network bursts decreased at DIV 28 and 35. This transition in network development is reflected by the evaluation of different network parameters of untreated solvent control wells (0.1% DMSO) from all plates contributing to this study (n = 41 plates and 123 wells). Figure 4B-E shows the distribution of different parameters between experiments (each data point reflects the median of 3 wells of each independent experiment) and indicates the varia- tion of the hNNF assay. On DIV 7 and 14, the mean firing rate was notably below 5 Hz, but then rose to 10 Hz, with its peak at DIV 28 (Fig. 4B). The same trend was observed for the duration of bursts between DIV 7 and 35 (Fig. 4C). Nevertheless, some parameters, like the network burst percentage or the AUNCC, continuously increased until DIV 35 (Fig. 4D,E). Because the highly organized activity of the network is rarely observed at DIV 7 and 14 (Fig. 4E), network burst parameters were only considered from DIV 21 to 35 for the following evaluations.

To show that neural network development within the hNNF assay can be altered by a specific mechanism, DIV 7 networks were exposed to different concentrations of the PKC inhibitor Bis-I following the exposure scheme described in Figure 1. Bis-I inhibited

<!-- image -->

Tab. 1: 14 Parameters from MEA recordings and their respective inter-experimental variability as coefficient of variation (COV)

| Category          | Parameter                                       | Definition                                                                                                                                  |   Inter-experimental COV |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| General activity  | Mean firing rate                                | Total number of spikes divided by the duration of the analysis (Hz)                                                                         |                    28.45 |
| General activity  | Number of active electrodes                     | Number of electrodes with activity > 5 spikes/min                                                                                           |                     9.97 |
| General activity  | Number of bursting electrodes                   | Total number of electrodes within the well with bursts/min greater than the burst electrode criterion (min # of spikes: 5; max ISI: 100 ms) |                    11.14 |
| Bursting activity | Burst duration                                  | Average time from the first spike to last spike in a single-electrode burst                                                                 |                    11.24 |
| Bursting activity | Number of spikes per burst                      | Average number of spikes in a single-electrode burst                                                                                        |                    25.17 |
| Bursting activity | Mean ISI within burst                           | Mean inter-spike interval, time between spikes, for spikes in a single- electrode burst                                                     |                     5.94 |
| Bursting activity | Inter-burst interval                            | Average time between the start of single-electrode bursts                                                                                   |                    19.18 |
| Bursting activity | Burst frequency                                 | Total number of single-electrode bursts divided by the duration of the analysis (Hz)                                                        |                    28.6  |
| Connectivity      | Burst percentage                                | Number of spikes in single-electrode bursts divided by total number of spikes, multiplied by 100                                            |                    14.67 |
| Connectivity      | Network burst frequency                         | Total number of network bursts divided by the duration of the analysis (Hz)                                                                 |                    20.83 |
| Connectivity      | Network burst duration                          | Average time from the first spike to last spike in a network burst                                                                          |                    11.42 |
| Connectivity      | Network burst percentage                        | The number of spikes in network bursts divided by the total number of spikes, multiplied by 100                                             |                     7.08 |
| Connectivity      | Number of spikes per network burst              | Average number of spikes in a network burst                                                                                                 |                    29.01 |
| Connectivity      | Area under normalized cross-correlation (AUNCC) | Area under the well-wide pooled inter-electrode cross-correlation normalized to the auto-correlations                                       |                    14.73 |

neurite outgrowth in PC-12 cells (Das et al., 2004), rat cortical neurons, and hiPSC-derived neurons (Druwe et al., 2016). Furthermore, in vitro MEA experiments showed decreased firing and bursting rates of rat neural networks after Bis-I exposure (Robinette et al., 2011). We observed that network activity was affected by Bis-I in a concentration-dependent manner, as illustrated by representative network parameters in Figure 4F-I. Untreated controls showed a mean firing rate of more than 10 Hz on DIV 35, whereas Bis-I interfered with the formation of a functional network starting at low concentrations of 0.12 µM, resulting in about 5 Hz (Fig. 4F). Exposure to 10 µM Bis-I resulted in a fully muted network at DIV 28 and DIV 35 regarding all four displayed network parameters. The network burst percentage was also reduced to 20% at DIV 21 and 28 by 1.11 µM Bis-I and to 0% at DIV 35 (Fig. 4H). This impairment in network bursting is also reflected in the AUNCC (Fig. 4I). After this initial proof-of-concept, Bis-I was introduced as an endpoint-specific positive control for the hNNF test method. For this purpose, each experimental run in the compound screening contained control wells treated with 5 µM Bis-I. The data of 13 independent experiments (39 wells) showed that  Bis-I  reliably  and  significantly  inhibits  different  network parameters,  e.g.,  burst  duration,  network  burst  percentage,  and network  synchronicity  (AUNCC,  Fig.  S2 1 ).  The  overall  effect of Bis-I on the mean firing rate was not statistically significant, which may be due to the higher variability of this parameter, as explained in the next section (see Fig. S2 1 ).

## Selection of parameters to evaluate

MEA recordings generated in this study result in 72 network parameters, which are predominantly correlated and can be grouped into spike-, burst- and network-related parameters. A plethora of these define the same characteristic of the network (e.g., 'mean firing rate' and 'weighted mean firing rate') or use a different statistical method to describe the parameter (e.g., 'inter-burst interval-Avg' vs 'inter-burst interval (median)-Avg'). The evaluation of one 48-well MEA plate during a time course of 35 days results in over 17,000 data points, which makes the processing of data and interpretation of possible compound effects enormously  challenging.  To  reduce  the  number  of  data  points  and  only concentrate on the most informative and at the same time robust parameters, we analyzed the variability of all parameters across all wells treated with the lowest concentration of each test compound. To this end, we calculated the inter-experimental variability for each parameter by merging the endpoint responses of the lowest concentrations of independent experiments relative to the solvent control and normalizing these. Afterwards, we derived

一

A

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5: Example data for area under the curve (AUC) summary of time- and concentration-dependent MEA readouts

<!-- image -->

(A-C) Starting at DIV 7, neural networks were treated with increasing concentrations of deltamethrin (A), β-cyfluthrin (B), and α-endosulfan (C), and exemplary network parameters were evaluated. Time- and concentration-dependent data are shown as the mean of three (A, B) or two (C) independent experiments ± SEM (A, B) or SD (C). AUC values were computed for these data and plotted in a concentrationdependent relationship (D-F). Compounds did not induce cytotoxicity (data not shown). Data are represented as the mean of three (D, E) or two (F) independent experiments ± SEM (D, E) or ± SD (F). Replicates within one experiment are summarized by median. Curve fitting was conducted as described in Section 2. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA. A p-value below 0.05 was termed significant. *, significant compared to the respective solvent control.

the inter-experimental variability as the coefficient of variation (COV) of these collections of data points for each compound. The higher the COV, the greater is the dispersion. Additionally, we  included  parameters  that  were  previously  described  in  the literature (Brown et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017; Kosnik et al., 2020)  and  represent  a  broad  variety  of  network  development characteristics. We then selected a final set of 14 network parameters that cover the three categories 'general activity', 'bursting activity', and 'connectivity' of neural networks and have a COV between 6 and 29 (Tab. 1).

## Concentration-dependent effects of pesticides on network activity

After  having  set  up  the  hNNF  assay  by  defining  a  treatment scheme  and  standard  operating  procedure,  establishing  an  endpoint-specific control, and evaluating variability over wells and plates, we next applied the hNNF assay to screen 28 chemicals. The set consists of 27 pesticides plus acetaminophen as a negative control  compound.  To  identify  concentration-dependent  effects of substances that impaired neural network formation, cells were exposed weekly from DIV 7 to 35, including respective washout steps 24 h before each recording. As an example, deltamethrin and

β-cyfluthrin reduced the mean firing rate (Fig. 5A) and AUNCC (Fig. 5B) of neural networks, respectively, in a time- and concentration-dependent manner without inducing cytotoxicity. Acibenzolar-S-methyl, on the other hand, did not affect the number of active  electrodes  (Fig.  5C).  These  time-concentration  relationships can be translated into concentration-response curves as illustrated in Figure 5D-F. For each concentration, the trapezoidal AUC was calculated to include all five time points in one single value per concentration. This approach, adapted from Brown et al. (2016) and Shafer (2019), simplifies the comparison of effects over different days of neural network development. In the next step, the AUC information and resulting concentration-response curves were used to estimate BMCs with upper and lower confidence limits for each compound and parameter. For estimation of the BMCs, a benchmark response (BMR) of 50% (BMR50) was selected as this best reflects the variability of the most variable parameters (see Tab. 1).

Figure  6  summarizes  the  concentration-dependent  effects  of the  28  tested  compounds  on  neural  network  development  that produced a 50% change (reduction or induction) from the curve's starting point. Five of the 14 network parameters were not affected by any compound, including number of active electrodes and

<!-- image -->

mean inter-spike interval within bursts. 17 compounds tested negative, e.g., acetaminophen, chlorpyrifos, and its derivate chlorpyrifos-methyl (data not shown). 11 of the 27 pesticides are considered positive, for which at least one network parameter had to be affected without cytotoxic effects at any administered concentration. β-Cyfluthrin, β-cypermethrin, deltamethrin, penthiopyrad, and rotenone evoked effects in more than two parameters, whereas the other six pesticides affected one or two parameters. Network burst frequency was the most sensitive parameter with six hits, of which five  represent  inductive  effects.  Furthermore,  spirodiclofen  and penthiopyrad additively  increased  the  burst  frequency.  Predominantly, the observed effects are all in a similar range between 9 and 20  µM.  In  contrast,  deltamethrin  and  metaflumizone  influenced different network parameters below 9 µM. Rotenone is denoted as the most potent compound, specifically reducing seven parameters in a concentration range between 0.15 and 0.24 µM without causing cytotoxicity. The network parameter connectedness, e.g., burst rate and mean firing rate, seen after rotenone treatment is not visible for all compounds. This might be due to parameters compensat-

3  doi:10.14573/altex.2206031s2

一

<!-- image -->

## Fig. 6: Summary of BMCs across 14 network parameters of the hNNF assay

No cytotoxicity was observed. 17 compounds had no effect (acetaminophen, acetamiprid, acibenzolar-s-methyl, aldicarb, chlorpyrifos, chlorpyrifos-methyl, clothianidin, diazinon, dimethoate, dinotefuran, disulfoton, etofenprox, flufenacet, methamidophos, thiacloprid, thiamethoxam, triallate; data not shown). Δ, induced effects; numbers are given in µM. No value assumes BMCs &gt; 20 µM (&gt; 0.3 µM for rotenone). Confidence intervals are listed in Table S2 3 . AUNCC, area under normalized cross-correlation.

ing each other, like penthiopyrad decreasing the number of spikes per burst and increasing the burst frequency at the same time or BMCs being close to the upper testing limit, like for β-cyfluthrin.

## 4  Discussion

In the last years, scientists from academia, industry, and regulatory authorities across the world agreed on the need for a standardized in vitro testing strategy, aiming for a cheaper and faster generation of additional data for DNT hazard assessment (EFSA, 2013; Crofton et al., 2014; Bal-Price et al., 2015, 2018; Fritsche et al., 2017, 2018a,b). This resulted in the compilation of a DNT IVB, which includes various test methods covering different KEs of  neurodevelopment, including the formation and function of neural networks (Fritsche, 2017; Fritsche et al., 2017; Bal-Price et al., 2018). One of the gaps identified in the DNT IVB is the assessment of network formation and function in a human-based cell model (Crofton and Mundy, 2021). To fill this gap, we estab-

<!-- image -->

lished the human neural network formation assay (hNNF), which consists of hiPSC-derived excitatory and inhibitory neurons and primary astroglia (SynFire, NeuCyte, USA). The functionality of neuronal subtypes and the ability of the cell model to detect alterations via a known MoA were confirmed by pharmacological modulation. When challenged with a test set of 28 substances, the assay revealed compound-specific effects of different pesticides on network development.

## 4.1  Assay establishment

Under most circumstances, newly developed methods for DNT testing are restricted by their inability to test large numbers of chemicals (Coecke et al., 2007; Crofton et al., 2011). To tackle this issue, Crofton et al. (2011) provided a set of 15 principles aiming  to  enhance  assay  amenability  to  higher  throughput screening. The  establishment  of  the  hNNF  assay  in  this  study was realized by considering these principles, which are described in more detail in the following (P1-15). During early brain development,  neurons  start  to  mature  and  build  connections  via synapses  (Okado  et  al.,  1979;  Zhang  and  Poo,  2001).  Neural network formation and function is therefore a key aspect of neurodevelopment (P1 'Key event of neurodevelopment'). By measuring extracellular local field potentials on MEAs, network formation and function can be assessed, thus providing information on  electrical  activity,  firing  patterns,  and  synchronicity  of  the neural networks (P2 'Endpoint measurement'). By calculating the AUC for each concentration and normalizing the values to the respective solvent control, the hNNF assay can reflect alterations  of  network  activity  in  both  directions  (increase  and  decrease; P3 'Dynamic range'). Furthermore, Crofton et al. (2011) emphasize the importance of parametric controls, meaning parameters of the assay that evoke predictable changes in the endpoint (P4 'Parametric controls'). One aspect that was confirmed within the presented study is the increase in electrical activity and synchronicity of the networks with increasing culture time (Fig. 3). Furthermore, Saavedra and colleagues showed that an excitatory:inhibitory (ex:inh) ratio of 70:30 using SynFire neurons exhibits the steadiest spiking increase and coverage of electrodes over differentiation time compared to other ex:inh ratios (Saavedra  et  al.,  2021).  Principle  5  ('Response  characterization') highlights the relevance of a precise effect characterization, based on the degree of variability in the assay. As recommended by the EFSA Scientific Committee, the BMC approach was  applied  to  derive  a  reference  point  or  point  of  departure (Hardy et al., 2017), whereby the BMR should be defined as an effect size that is higher than the general variability of the measured endpoint. Based on the inter-experimental standard deviation (1.5*COV), which was calculated for every parameter presented in this study (Tab. 1), we defined the BMR50 (reduction) and BMR50ind (induction) as the degree of change that, if exceeded, results in a positive response (hit). Furthermore, Crofton and colleagues (2011) state that the concentration range covered, and the resulting concentration-response, play a highly significant role in terms of comparison of sensitivity between different endpoints. For this study, we selected a concentration range that has already been used in other in vitro DNT assays and has elicit- ed little to no cytotoxicity (Frank et al., 2017; Masjosthusmann et  al.,  2020;  Blum et al., 2022). To discriminate specific from unspecific  effects,  we  assessed  the  cytotoxicity  of  each  compound on a weekly level during the 35-day culture period (P7 'Endpoint selectivity'). Another crucial requirement for assay development is the selection of endpoint-specific controls, altering the endpoint by known MoA both negatively and positively. In the present study, Bis-I, a PKC inhibitor was selected as an endpoint-specific control (P8 'Endpoint-selective controls'). In primary rat cortical cells, the inhibition of PKC blocked the local astrocytic contact and thus the facilitation of excitatory synaptogenesis throughout the neuron (Hama et al., 2004). In particular, in  MEA  experiments,  Bis-I  decreased  the  firing  and  bursting rates  of  rat  neural  networks in  vitro (Robinette  et  al.,  2011). Within the hNNF assay, Bis-I reliably reduced network parameters, e.g., burst duration, network burst percentage, and network synchronicity (AUNCC). Due to the enhanced variability of the mean firing rate, no significant effect of Bis-I was observed over all conducted experimental runs. Nevertheless, Bis-I is an appropriate endpoint-specific control for assessing neural network activity in vitro . As a negative control compound, acetaminophen showed no effect on network activity. A plethora of studies confirmed the use of acetaminophen as an apt negative control for DNT in vitro testing (Radio et al., 2008; Stern et al., 2014; Brown et  al.,  2016;  Masjosthusmann et  al.,  2020).  Nevertheless,  a  recently published study by Martin and colleagues categorized acetaminophen as an unfavorable negative control for DNT assays (Martin et al., 2022). This classification was made based on both clinical and preclinical reports, which indicate potential effects on  the  developing  brain.  Furthermore,  the  authors  propose  the use of low concentrations of acetaminophen (≤ 100 μM) in recent DNT  studies  as  a  possible  reason  for  the  absence  of  compound-dependent effects. In comparison, chemicals like L-ascorbic acid, dinotefuran, and metformin were listed as 'favorable' and should be included in a compound set for later determination of the assay's general performance (Martin et al., 2022). Following the recommendations of Crofton and colleagues, a training set of chemicals should be designed and assayed (P9 'Training set chemicals') after demonstrating that the test method has the aforementioned characteristics. Chemicals that produce a reliable effect on the endpoint in focus and chemicals that do not should be included, which allows both specificity and sensitivity of the assay to be determined (P11 'Specificity and sensitivity'). The hNNF assay was established and used within a research project with a focus on pesticides. Owing to the high cost involved in performing substance screening in the assay, it was not possible to distinguish between training and test set of chemicals during the establishment process. Instead, we selected pesticides that have a different DNT potential according to several in vivo and in vitro studies (P10 'Testing set chemicals'; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020). Pyrethroids, for example, are connected to neurodevelopmental disorders during childhood after pyrethroid pesticide exposure in epidemiological studies (Oulhote and Bouchard, 2013; Xue et al., 2013; Pitzer et al., 2021). Especially deltamethrin is a thoroughly studied type II pyrethroid, for which animal studies reported long-term effects on the brain (summa-

rized in Pitzer et al., 2021), which was also observed in vitro (Shafer et al., 2008; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020). In contrast, the neonicotinoid dinotefuran was described as DNT negative in vivo (Sheets et al., 2016) and also recommended as a negative tool  compound for alternative DNT test methods (Aschner et al., 2017). In the future, the hNNF assay will be challenged with more chemicals that are well-described DNT positive and negative compounds to assess specificity and sensitivity of the assay and to enhance the readiness of the test method (Bal-Price et al., 2018). Currently, the academic setup of the hNNF assay allows parallel testing of 12 compounds (n = 1) within the 35-day experimental  period.  However,  it  is  possible  to  increase  the throughput  by  increasing  the  plate  size  format  from  48-  to 96-well or by introducing automation. Duplicating the experimental set-up by using multiple MEA recording devices or by shifting the recording days in a periodic manner would also increase  the  throughput  (P12  'High  throughput').  Principle  13 ('Documentation') highlights the importance of documenting the test method in detail to allow easy transfer and implementation across laboratories. A detailed standardized protocol exists and is currently being transferred to a laboratory of the U.S. EPA. After initial establishment of the assay in the collaborating laboratory, the hNNF assay will be challenged with a set of test substances to inform about the robustness and inter-laboratory transferability of the assay. This point is also emphasized in principle 14 ('Transferability'), along with the guaranteed availability of the cells used, which can be purchased commercially by other researchers. Currently, the generated data is not being  shared  through  an  open  access  databased  (P15  'Data sharing'), but the authors aim to include hNNF data in a future ToxCast™ 4  release.

In summary, the hNNF assay fulfils the majority of the principles proposed by Crofton et al. (2011) for the establishment of in vitro DNT assays for substance screening. Currently, the low number of tested chemicals defines the lack of readiness of the assay (Phase I Readiness Score B, Phase II Readiness Score C; Bal-Price et al., 2018), and the improvements required for the assay to be ready will be tackled in the future by testing known DNT positive substances (Aschner et al., 2017).

## 4.2  The hNNF assay compared to its rat counterpart

The hNNF assay was established to model neural network formation and function in a human-based cell model and to become a valuable addition to the current DNT IVB, which comprises 17 different test methods able to measure changes in key neurodevelopmental processes (Masjosthusmann et al., 2020; Crofton  and  Mundy,  2021).  Neural  network  formation  and function is currently modelled in an assay based on rat primary cortical  cells  (rNNF),  assessing  the  developmental  effects  of chemicals over 12 days of differentiation (Brown et al., 2016). It is important to mention that we aligned the hNNF assay with the parameter set of the rNNF assay, and thus both assays provide  comparable  parameters  of  network  development  (e.g.,

4  http://www.epa.gov/ncct/toxcast

<!-- image -->

number of active electrodes or burst duration) to reduce uncertainty. Table 2 juxtaposes the results obtained in this study with rNNF data (Frank et al., 2017). Comparing the BMC50 values of the most sensitive endpoint (MSE) between the hNNF and rNNF assay, it becomes clear that the observed positive hits differ in sensitivity across all substances. The rNNF seems to be more sensitive as it detects effects on network activity even at lower concentrations of the tested substances, e.g., deltamethrin (BMC50 MSE hNNF: 2.74 µM; BMC50 MSE rNNF: 0.5 µM). Aldicarb and chlorpyrifos were negative in the hNNF but altered  network  formation  in  the  rNNF  assay. Acetaminophen was tested negative in both assays.

The  hNNF and rNNF are referred  to  as  complementary  assays because they measure similar endpoints, i.e., several MEA parameters,  but  differ  with  regard  to  species  (rat  vs.  human), presence  of  fetal  bovine  serum  (FBS),  and  assay  technology (beginning  and  washout  of  compounds  before  MEA  recordings). Therefore, differences in data obtained within these assays are not necessarily evidential of a false detection (Crofton and Mundy, 2021). These differences may result from several differences in the assay setup, i.e., species differences and exposure schemes. The hNNF and rNNF assays are based on the same basic cell types, namely neurons and astrocytes, but derived from different species (hNNF: human iPSC-derived neurons and primary astroglia; rNNF: rat primary neocortical cells). It is widely accepted that the predictability of non-human-based assays for human health is limited by species differences (Leist and Hartung, 2013). Also, primary neural progenitor cells (NPC) derived from rats (PND5) are more sensitive towards exposure to DNT compounds  compared  to  time-matched  primary  human  NPCs in  vitro (Baumann  et  al.,  2016).  These  two  systems  differ  not only in their sensitivity but also with regard to their molecular equipment notwithstanding similar cellular functions (e.g., NPC migration and differentiation; Masjosthusmann et al., 2018). Recently, the co-culture system applied in this study was used for comparing acute effects of neurotoxic compounds on network activity to rodent cultures (rNNF) and revealed a considerable delay in human iPSC-derived neuronal and glial co-culture compared to rat cortical cultures (Saavedra et al., 2021). In general, the developing rat brain exhibits some crucial differences to human brain development in vivo , such as the absence of gyrification, which adds complexity to the human brain (Dubois et al., 2008). Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that embryonic day (E) 18 and E21 during rat brain development match week 8-9 and week 15-16 after fertilization in human embryo, when looking at neurogenesis (Bayer et al., 1993). The faster maturation of rodent cells compared to human cells in vitro was also suggested by Masjosthusmann et al. (2018).

As the compound set presented in Table 2 is rather small and focused on pesticides, we cannot draw general conclusions about species-specific differences in sensitivity between the rNNF and hNNF assays. As suggested by Baumann et al. (2016), testing of additional compounds with known MoAs is required to infer

Tab. 2: Comparison of BMC50 values of the most sensitive endpoint (MSE) for chemicals (same CASRN) tested in the hNNF (this study) and rNNF assay (Frank et al., 2017)

<!-- image -->

↑ indicates an inductive effect (BMC50ind).

|                 | Acetaminophen   | Aldicarb   | Carbaryl   | Chlorpyrifos   |   Deltamethrin | Fipronil   |   Imidacloprid |
|-----------------|-----------------|------------|------------|----------------|----------------|------------|----------------|
| BMC 50 MSE hNNF | no hit          | no hit     | 17.31 ↑    | no hit         |           2.74 | 11.48 ↑    |          15.51 |
| BMC 50 MSE rNNF | no hit          | 0.66       | 0.08       | 1.4            |           0.5  | 1.33       |           9.99 |

more general species-specific sensitivity. Nevertheless, our data highlights the importance of considering species specificities when comparing screening results.

Besides the species, experimental procedures differ between the human and rat NNF assays and may also lead to differences in assay sensitivity. Two major exposure differences are crucial. First,  the  time  point  when  the  compound is administered differs between the hNNF and rNNF assay. Rat cortical cultures are exposed to the compound two hours after seeding the cells on MEAs, whereas the first day of dosing in hNNF experiments is DIV 7, when first single spike activities are visible. The respective networks are at different stages of development at this time, i.e., in contrast to human cells, rat cortical cells are barely established in the culture dish. Not yet established cells challenged shortly after the plating process may be more susceptible to substance exposure than networks that have already been able to differentiate for a week in chemical-free medium. In the rNNF  assay,  early  processes  like  neurite  initiation  and  outgrowth as  well  as  glial  proliferation  are  potentially  disrupted within the first 24 h (Harrill et al., 2011; Frank et al., 2017), whereas  these  processes  can  proceed  undisturbed  during  the first seven days of differentiation and contribute to network development in the hNNF assay. Both assays thus depict different stages of neural network development and hence include different windows of neurodevelopmental processes. In addition, the hNNF culture medium, in contrast to the rNNF medium, is supplemented with FBS, which contains a variety of plasma proteins, peptides, and growth factors. Recent studies have shown that FBS in cell culture medium attenuates the toxicity caused by specific compounds due to their high affinity for binding to proteins, which then results in higher BMC values (Zhang, Y. et al., 2016; Zhang, R., 2020). The influence of FBS on the human cultures with regards to network effects needs to be studied by assessment of in vitro kinetics in the future (Kramer et al., 2015). Secondly, the washout of the respective compound 24 h prior to the recording is a unique feature of the hNNF assay and aims at minimizing acute substance effects during MEA recordings. There is evidence that specific substances directly target synaptic receptors and acutely affect brain function. For example, the NMDAR is a prime target of the heavy metal lead, leading to the inhibition of glutamatergic synapse activity (Toscano and Guilarte, 2005). To diminish the measurement of these acute effects and to only assess the effects of substances on neural network development, we introduced washout steps into the experimental procedure of the hNNF. In comparison to the rNNF results (Tab. 2), it is possible that the presence of compounds during

MEA measurements contributes to higher sensitivity of the rat versus the human NNF assay.

All of the aforementioned variations in assay setup and biology, either alone or in combination, can explain the discrepancies in sensitivity between the two test methods. In the future, exposure schemes of the two NNF assays should be harmonized in order to understand the true nature of species differences concerning neural network formation. This might substantially help to extrapolate from rat in vivo studies to humans using the parallelogram approach (Baumann et al., 2016).

## 4.3  Use of hNNF data on deltamethrin for the development of a putative AOP

In 2021, the EFSA developed an IATA case study with the goal of including all available in vivo and in vitro data, among others the data generated within the DNT IVB for DNT hazard identification  for  the  Type  II  pyrethroid  insecticide  deltamethrin (Crofton and Mundy, 2021; Hernández-Jerez et al., 2021). Epidemiological studies revealed associations between childhood exposure to pyrethroids like deltamethrin and neurodevelopmental disorders, e.g., attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or autism spectrum disorder (Oulhote and Bouchard, 2013; Shelton et al., 2014; Wagner-Schuman et al., 2015). As previously shown, deltamethrin negatively influenced 5 of 14 parameters describing network function with 'Number of spikes per network burst' as the most sensitive endpoint within the hNNF assay (BMC50 2.7 µM). Here, interference with voltage-gated sodium channels is  the  most commonly known MoA for pyrethroid insecticides like  deltamethrin  (Tapia  et  al.,  2020),  representing  one  of  two molecular  initiating  events  (MIE)  within  the  stressor-specific AOP network (Fig. 7). This MIE is followed by key events 1-6 and 9, describing different cellular responses, like the disruption of sodium channel gate kinetics leading to disruption of action potential,  that  in  the  end  cumulate  in  an  impaired  behavioral  function (adverse outcome). KE4 describes the alteration of neural network function as shown also by data assessed in the rNNF  (BMC50  0.5  µM;  Tab.  2)  and  hNNF  assay.  The  5-fold higher BMC of the hNNF assay compared to the rNNF assay might be explained by the different exposure paradigm and/or the different species as discussed above in more detail. Furthermore, potential mechanisms or processes that are disrupted by a chemical agent can be revealed and used for the development of adverse outcome pathways (AOP) and also set a new focus for more hypothesis-driven in vivo studies (Hernández-Jerez et al., 2021). The postulated stressor-based AOP network (Fig. 7) is currently not included in the OECD AOP Wiki, but the EFSA

一

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7: AOP network on deltamethrin postulated by the EFSA Panel on Plant Protection Products and their Residues

<!-- image -->

Non-adjacent key events for which the biological reasonability and/or empirical evidence is less assured are marked by dashed lines. MIE, molecular initiating event; KE, key event; KER, key event relationship; AO, adverse outcome. Adapted from Hernández-Jerez et al. (2021).

Panel  on  Plant  Protection  Products  and  their  Residues  recommends its submission to the OECD program to further support a regulatory uptake. This case study and the inclusion of hNNF data  on  deltamethrin  exposure  showed  the  applicability  of  the hNNF assay for hazard identification and characterization, consistent with the other assays of the DNT IVB.

The  presented  study  provides  insight  into  the  establishment of a novel new approach method assessing alterations on neural network formation and function using an hiPSC-derived co-culture of neurons and primary astroglia. The cell model comprises a broad variety of genes expressed exclusively in neurons and astrocytes as a prerequisite for neural network function after the GABA switch. For example, together with the rNNF assay, it is capable of representing NMDAR expression and assessing any MoA involving  NMDAR,  which  distinguishes  these  NNF  assays from other assays of the DNT IVB (Masjosthusmann et al., 2020). Compared to other studies using excitatory and inhibitory iNs, the hNNF performs similarly with regard to, e.g., firing rates and number of active electrodes. For example, Saavedra and colleagues cultured the excitatory and inhibitory iNS, which resulted in 14 to 16 active electrodes after 37 days and a mean firing rate between 1 and 2 Hz after 21 days. Furthermore, the described test system was successfully used to assess acute neuroactive effects of chemicals (Saavedra et al., 2021; Tukker et al., 2020a,b). Although multiple labs utilize MEAs for assessing acute effects on neural network activity, the number of publications dealing with the effects of pesticides on electrophysiological endpoints for DNT using human cells is very limited (Di Consiglio et al., 2020; Pistollato et al., 2021).

Besides astrocytes, also other cell types play an important role in development and function of neural networks, such as oligodendrocytes, responsible for myelination (Doretto et al., 2011), or microglia, which, among other things, phagocytose weak syn- apses and regulate neurogenesis (Miyamoto et al., 2016; Paolicelli  and  Ferretti,  2017).  To  represent  all  processes  appropriately, the hNNF assay must be complemented with the missing cell types. Still, a proactive establishment of the assay already reached a medium readiness for use in regulatory screening approaches with possible improvements in type and number of test method controls, inter- and intra-lab transferability, and definition of the applicability domains. The testing of 28 substances revealed the suitability of the assay for screening environmental chemicals like pesticides. In the future, the throughput of the hNNF assay as well as its robustness and specificity will be increased by testing additional substances, thereby enlarging the chemical space, to present a suitable addition to the current DNT IVB and close one of the identified gaps regarding network formation and function.

## References

Aschner, M., Ceccatelli, S.,  Daneshian,  M.  et  al.  (2017).  Reference compounds for alternative test methods to indicate developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) potential of chemicals: Example lists and criteria for their selection and use. ALTEX 34 , 49-74. doi:10.14573/altex.1604201

Bal-Price, A., Crofton, K. M., Leist, M. et al. (2015). International STakeholder NETwork (ISTNET): Creating a developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) testing road map for regulatory purposes. Arch Toxicol 89 , 269-287. doi:10.1007/S00204-015-1464-2

Bal-Price, A., Hogberg, H. T., Crofton, K. M. et al. (2018). Recommendation on test readiness criteria for new approach methods in toxicology: Exemplified for developmental neurotoxicity. ALTEX 35 , 306-352. doi:10.14573/altex.1712081

Bartmann, K., Hartmann, J., Kapr, J. et al. (2021). Measurement of  electrical  activity  of  differentiated  human  iPSC-derived

<!-- image -->

- neurospheres recorded by microelectrode arrays (MEA). In J. Llorens  and  M.  Barenys  (eds), Experimental Neurotoxicology Methods (473-488).  Neuromethods  172.  New York:  Humana. doi:10.1007/978-1-0716-1637-6\_22
- Baumann, J., Barenys, M., Gassmann, K. et al. (2014). Comparative  human  and  rat  'neurosphere  assay'  for  developmental neurotoxicity testing. Curr Protoc Toxicol 59 , 12.21.1-12.21.24. doi:10.1002/0471140856.TX1221S59
- Baumann, J., Dach, K., Barenys, M. et al. (2015). Application of the neurosphere assay for DNT hazard assessment: Challenges and limitations.  In Methods in Pharmacology and Toxicology (29). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press. doi:10.1007/7653\_2015\_49
- Baumann,  J.,  Gassmann,  K.,  Masjosthusmann,  S.  et  al.  (2016). Comparative human and rat neurospheres reveal species differences  in  chemical  effects  on  neurodevelopmental  key  events. Arch Toxicol 90 , 1415-1427. doi:10.1007/S00204-015-1568-8
- Bayer, S. A., Altman, J., Russo, R. J. et al. (1993). Timetables of neurogenesis in the human brain based on experimentally determined patterns in the rat. Neurotoxicology 14 , 83-144.
- Bennett, D., Bellinger, D. C., Birnbaum, L. S. et al. (2016). Project TENDR:  Targeting  environmental  neuro-developmental  risks the TENDR consensus statement. Environ Health Perspect 124 , A118-A122. doi:10.1289/EHP358
- Bjørling-Poulsen, M., Andersen, H. R. and Grandjean, P. (2008). Potential  developmental  neurotoxicity  of  pesticides  used  in Europe. Environ Health 7 , 50. doi:10.1186/1476-069X-7-50
- Blum,  J.,  Masjosthusmann,  S.,  Bartmann,  K.  et  al.  (2022). Establishment of a human cell-based in vitro battery to assess developmental neurotoxicity hazard of chemicals. Chemosphere 311 , 137035. doi:10.1016/J.chemosphere.2022.137035
- Brown, J. P., Hall, D., Frank, C. L. et al. (2016). Evaluation of a microelectrode  array-based  assay  for  neural  network  ontogeny  using  training  set  chemicals. Toxicol  Sci 154 ,  126-139. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfw147
- Carstens,  K.  E.,  Carpenter,  A.  F.,  Martin,  M.  M.  et  al.  (2022). Integrating data from in vitro new approach methodologies for developmental  neurotoxicity. Toxicol  Sci 187 ,  62-79.  doi:10. 1093/toxsci/kfac018
- Coecke, S., Goldberg, A. M., Allen, S. et al. (2007). Workgroup report: Incorporating in vitro alternative methods for developmental neurotoxicity into international hazard and risk assessment strategies. Environ Health Perspect 115 , 924-931. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9427
- Crofton, K. M., Mundy, W. R., Lein, P. J. et al. (2011). Developmental neurotoxicity testing: Recommendations for developing alternative methods for the screening and prioritization of chemicals. ALTEX 28 , 9-15. doi:10.14573/altex.2011.1.009
- Crofton, K. M., Mundy, W. R. and Shafer, T. J. (2012). Developmental neurotoxicity testing: A path forward. Congenit Anom 52 , 140-146. doi:10.1111/j.1741-4520.2012.00377.x
- Crofton, K., Fritsche, E., Ylikomi, T. et al. (2014). International STakeholder NETwork (ISTNET) for creating a developmental neurotoxicity testing (DNT) roadmap for regulatory purposes. ALTEX 31 , 223-224. doi:10.14573/altex.1402121
- Crofton, K. M. and Mundy, W. R. (2021). External scientific report on the interpretation of data from the developmental neurotoxic-
- ity in vitro testing assays for use in integrated approaches for testing and assessment. EFSA Support Publ 18 , 6924E. doi:10.2903/ sp.efsa.2021.en-6924
- Dach, K., Bendt, F., Huebenthal, U. et al. (2017). BDE-99 impairs differentiation  of  human  and  mouse  NPCs  into  the  oligodendroglial lineage by species-specific modes of action. Sci Rep 7 , 44861. doi:10.1038/srep44861
- Das, K. P., Freudenrich, T. M. and Mundy, W. R. (2004). Assess. ment of PC12 cell differentiation and neurite growth: A comparison of morphological and neurochemical measures. Neurotoxicol Teratol 26 , 397-406. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2004.02.006
- Di Consiglio, E., Pistollato, F., Mendoza-De Gyves, E. et al. (2020). Integrating biokinetics and in vitro studies to evaluate developmental neurotoxicity induced by chlorpyrifos in human iPSCderived  neural  stem  cells  undergoing  differentiation  towards neuronal  and  glial  cells. Reprod  Toxicol 98 ,  174-188.  doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2020.09.010
- Doretto, S., Malerba, M., Ramos, M. et al. (2011). Oligodendrocytes as regulators of neuronal networks during early postnatal development. PLoS  One 6 ,  19849.  doi:10.1371/journal.pone. 0019849
- Druwe, I., Freudenrich, T. M., Wallace, K. et al. (2015). Sensitivity of neuroprogenitor cells to chemical-induced apoptosis using a multiplexed assay suitable for high-throughput screening. Toxicology 333 , 14-24. doi:10.1016/J.TOX.2015.03.011
- Druwe, I., Freudenrich, T. M., Wallace, K. et al. (2016). Comparison of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons and rat primary cortical neurons as in vitro models of neurite outgrowth. Appl Vitr Toxicol 2 , 26-36. doi:10.1089/aivt.2015.0025
- Dubois, J., Benders, M., Borradori-Tolsa, C. et al. (2008). Primary cortical folding in the human newborn: An early marker of later functional development. Brain 131 , 2028-2041. doi:10.1093/ BRAIN/AWN137
- EFSA (2013). Scientific Opinion on the developmental neurotoxicity potential of acetamiprid and imidacloprid. EFSA J 11 , 3471. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2013.3471
- Frank, C. L., Brown, J. P., Wallace, K. et al. (2017). Developmental neurotoxicants  disrupt  activity  in  cortical  networks  on  microelectrode  arrays:  Results  of  screening  86  compounds  during neural  network  formation. Toxicol  Sci 160 ,  121-135.  doi:10. 1093/toxsci/kfx169
- Fritsche, E., Alm, H., Baumann, J. et al. (2015). Literature review on in vitro and alternative developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) testing  methods. EFSA  Support  Publ 12 ,  778E.  doi:10.2903/ sp.efsa.2015.en-778
- Fritsche, E. (2017). Report on Integrated Testing Strategies for the identification and evaluation of chemical hazards associated with the developmental neurotoxicity (DNT), to facilitate discussions at  the  Joint  EFSA/OECD  Workshop  on  DNT. EFSA Support Publ 14 , 1191E. doi:10.2903/sp.efsa.2017.en-1191
- Fritsche, E., Crofton, K. M., Hernandez, A. F. et al. (2017). OECD/ EFSA workshop on developmental neurotoxicity (DNT): The use of non-animal test methods for regulatory purposes. ALTEX 34 , 311-315. doi:10.14573/altex.1701171
- Fritsche, E., Barenys, M., Klose, J. et al. (2018a). Current availability of stem cell-based in vitro methods for developmental neu-

- rotoxicity (DNT) testing. Toxicol Sci 165 ,  21-30. doi:10.1093/ toxsci/kfy178
- Fritsche, E., Grandjean,  P., Crofton, K.  M.  et al.  (2018b). Consensus statement on the need for innovation, transition and implementation  of  developmental  neurotoxicity  (DNT)  testing for regulatory purposes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 354 , 3-6. doi:10.1016/J.TAAP.2018.02.004
- Glantz, L. A., Gilmore, J. H., Hamer, R. M. et al. (2007). Synaptophysin  and  PSD-95  in  the  human  prefrontal  cortex  from mid-gestation into early adulthood. Neuroscience 149 , 582-591. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.06.036
- Goldman, L. R. and Koduru, S. (2000). Chemicals in the environment  and  developmental  toxicity  to  children: A  public  health and policy perspective. Environ Health Perspect 108 , 443-448. doi:10.1289/EHP.00108S3443
- Grandjean, P. and Landrigan, P. (2006). Developmental neurotoxicity of industrial chemicals. Lancet 368 , 2167-2178. doi:10.1016/ S0140-6736(06)69665-7
- Hama, H., Hara, C., Yamaguchi, K. et al. (2004). PKC signaling mediates  global  enhancement  of  excitatory  synaptogenesis  in neurons triggered by local contact with astrocytes. Neuron 41 , 405-415. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00007-8
- Hardy, A., Benford, D., Halldorsson, T. et al. (2017). Guidance on the use of the weight of evidence approach in scientific assessments. EFSA J 15 , e04971. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2017.4971
- Harrill, J. A., Freudenrich, T. M., Machacek, D. W. et al. (2010). Quantitative assessment of neurite outgrowth in human embryonic stem cell-derived hN2 cells using automated high-content image  analysis. Neurotoxicology 31 ,  277-290.  doi:10.1016/j. neuro.2010.02.003
- Harrill, J. A., Robinette, B. L. and Mundy, W. R. (2011). Use of high content image analysis to detect chemical-induced changes  in  synaptogenesis  in  vitro. Toxicol  In  Vitro 25 ,  368-387. doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2010.10.011
- Harrill, J. A., Robinette, B. L., Freudenrich, T. et al. (2013). Use of high content image analyses to detect chemical-mediated effects on neurite sub-populations in primary rat cortical neurons. Neurotoxicology 34 , 61-73. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2012.10.013
- Harrill, J. A., Freudenrich, T., Wallace, K. et al. (2018). Testing for developmental neurotoxicity using a battery of in vitro assays for key cellular events in neurodevelopment. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 354 , 24-39. doi:10.1016/J.TAAP.2018.04.001
- Hernández-Jerez, A., Adriaanse, P., Aldrich, A. et al. (2021). Development of Integrated Approaches to Testing and Assessment (IATA) case studies on developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) risk assessment. EFSA J 19 , e06599. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2021.6599
- Hoelting, L., Klima, S., Karreman, C. et al. (2016). Stem cell-derived immature human dorsal root ganglia neurons to identify peripheral neurotoxicants. Stem Cells Transl Med 5 ,  476-487. doi:10.5966/SCTM.2015-0108
- Hofrichter, M., Nimtz, L., Tigges, J. et al. (2017). Comparative performance analysis of human iPSC-derived and primary neural progenitor cells (NPC) grown as neurospheres in vitro. Stem Cell Res 25 , 72-82. doi:10.1016/J.SCR.2017.10.013
- Holst, C. B., Brøchner, C. B., Vitting-Seerup, K. et al. (2019). Astrogliogenesis in human fetal brain: Complex spatiotemporal im-
- munoreactivity patterns of GFAP, S100, AQP4 and YKL-40. J Anat 235 , 590-615. doi:10.1111/JOA.12948
- Hyvärinen, T., Hyysalo, A., Kapucu, F. E. et al. (2019). Functional characterization of human pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical networks differentiated on laminin-521 substrate: Comparison to rat cortical cultures. Sci Rep 9 , 17125. doi:10.1038/s41598-01953647-8
- Ishii, M. N., Yamamoto, K., Shoji, M. et al. (2017). Human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neurons respond to convulsant drugs when co-cultured with hiPSC-derived astrocytes. Toxicology 389 , 130-138. doi:10.1016/j.tox.2017.06.010
- Johnstone, A. F. M., Gross, G. W., Weiss, D. G. et al. (2010). Microelectrode arrays: A physiologically based neurotoxicity testing platform for the 21 st  century. Neurotoxicology 31 , 331-350. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2010.04.001
- Johnston, G. A. R. (2013). Advantages of an antagonist: Bicuculline and other GABA antagonists. Br J Pharmacol 169 , 328-336. doi:10.1111/BPH.12127
- Karlin, A. (2002). Emerging structure of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci 3 , 102-114. doi:10.1038/nrn731
- Klose,  J.,  Tigges,  J.,  Masjosthusmann,  S.  et  al.  (2021).  TBBPA targets converging key events of human oligodendrocyte development resulting in two novel AOPs. ALTEX 38 , 215-234. doi: 10.14573/altex.2007201
- Koch, K., Bartmann, K., Hartmann, J. et al. (2022). Scientific va. lidation  of  human neurosphere assays for developmental neurotoxicity  evaluation. Front  Toxicol 4 ,  816370.  doi:10.3389/ ftox.2022.816370
- Kosnik, M. B., Strickland, J. D., Marvel, S. W. et al. (2020). Concentration-response evaluation of ToxCast compounds for multivariate activity patterns of neural network function. Arch Toxicol 94 , 469-484. doi:10.1007/s00204-019-02636-x
- Kramer, N. I., Di Consiglio, E., Blaauboer, B. J. et al. (2015). Biokinetics in repeated-dosing in vitro drug toxicity studies. Toxicol In Vitro 30 , 217-224. doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2015.09.005
- Krug, A. K., Balmer, N. V., Matt, F. et al. (2013). Evaluation of a human neurite growth assay as specific screen for developmental  neurotoxicants. Arch  Toxicol 87 ,  2215-2231.  doi:10.1007/ s00204-013-1072-y
- Kuehn, B. M. (2010). Increased risk of ADHD associated with early exposure to pesticides, PCBs. JAMA 304 , 27-28. doi:10.1001/ jama.2010.860
- Leist, M. and Hartung, T. (2013). Reprint: Inflammatory findings on species extrapolations: Humans are definitely no 70-kg mice. ALTEX 30 , 227-230. doi:10.14573/altex.2013.2.227
- Leonzino, M., Busnelli, M., Antonucci, F. et al. (2016). The timing of the excitatory-to-inhibitory GABA switch is regulated by the oxytocin receptor via KCC2. Cell Rep 15 , 96-103. doi:10.1016/j. celrep.2016.03.013
- Little, D., Ketteler, R., Gissen, P. et al. (2019). Using stem cell-derived  neurons  in  drug  screening  for  neurological  diseases. Neurobiol  Aging 78 ,  130-141.  doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging. 2019.02.008
- Maccioni, R. B. and Cambiazo, V. (1995). Role of microtubule-associated proteins in the control of microtubule assembly. Phys Rev 75 , 835-864. doi:10.1152/physrev.1995.75.4.835

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- Macdonald, R. L., Rogers, C. J. and Twyman, R. E. (1989). Kinetic properties of the GABAA receptor main conductance state of mouse spinal cord neurones in culture. J Physiol 410 , 479-499. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1989.sp017545
- Mack, C. M., Lin, B. J., Turner, J. D. et al. (2014). Burst and principal components analyses of MEA data for 16 chemicals describe at least three effects classes. Neurotoxicology 40 , 75-85. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2013.11.008
- Martin, M. M., Baker, N. C., Boyes, W. K. et al. (2022). An expert-driven literature review of 'negative' chemicals for developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) in vitro assay evaluation. Neurotoxicol Teratol 93 , 107117. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2022.107117
- Masjosthusmann, S., Becker, D., Petzuch, B. et al. (2018). A transcriptome  comparison  of  time-matched  developing  human, mouse  and  rat  neural  progenitor  cells  reveals  human  uniqueness. Toxicol  Appl  Pharmacol 354 ,  40-55.  doi:10.1016/j.taap. 2018.05.009
- Masjosthusmann, S., Blum, J., Bartmann, K. et al. (2020). Establishment of an a priori protocol for the implementation and interpretation of an in-vitro testing battery for the assessment of developmental  neurotoxicity. EFSA  Support  Publ  17 ,  1938E. doi:10.2903/sp.efsa.2020.en-1938
- Missale, C., Nash, S. R., Robinson, S. W. et al. (1998). Dopamine receptors: From structure to function. Physiol Rev 78 , 189-225. doi:10.1152/physrev.1998.78.1.189
- Miyamoto, A., Wake, H., Ishikawa, A. W. et al. (2016). Microglia contact induces synapse formation in developing somatosensory cortex. Nat Commun 7 , 12540. doi:10.1038/ncomms12540
- Neuman, R. S., Ben-Ari, Y., Gho, M. et al. (1988). Blockade of excitatory  synaptic  transmission  by  6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione  (CNQX)  in  the  hippocampus  in  vitro. Neurosci Lett 92 , 64-68. doi:10.1016/0304-3940(88)90743-4
- Nimtz, L., Klose, J., Masjosthusmann, S. et al. (2019). The neurosphere  assay  as  an  in  vitro  method  for  developmental  neurotoxicity  (DNT)  evaluation. Neuromethods 145 ,  141-168. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-9228-7\_8
- Nimtz, L., Hartmann, J., Tigges, J. et al. (2020). Characterization and application of electrically active neuronal networks established from human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural progenitor cells for neurotoxicity evaluation. Stem Cell Res 45 , 101761. doi:10.1016/j.scr.2020.101761
- NRC - National Research Council (2000). Scientific Frontiers in Developmental Toxicology and Risk Assessment . National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/9871
- Nyffeler,  J.,  Dolde,  X.,  Krebs, A.  et  al.  (2017).  Combination  of multiple neural crest migration assays to identify environmental toxicants from a proof-of-concept chemical library. Arch Toxicol 91 , 3613-3632. doi:10.1007/s00204-017-1977-y
- Ockleford, C., Adriaanse, P., Hougaard Bennekou, S. et al. (2018). Scientific opinion on pesticides in foods for infants and young children. EFSA J 16 , e05286. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2018.5286
- Odawara, A., Katoh, H., Matsuda, N. et al. (2016). Physiological maturation  and  drug  responses  of  human  induced  pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical neuronal networks in long-term culture. Sci Rep 6 , 26181. doi:10.1038/srep26181
- Odawara, A., Matsuda, N., Ishibashi, Y. et al. (2018). Toxicologi-
- cal evaluation of convulsant and anticonvulsant drugs in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical neuronal networks using an MEA system. Sci Rep 8 , 10416. doi:10.1038/s41598018-28835-7
- OECD (2007). Test No. 426: Developmental Neurotoxicity Study. OECD  Guidelines  for  the  Testing  of  Chemicals,  Section  4: Health Effects .  http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/20/52/37622194. pdf (accessed 22.07.2021)
- Okado, N., Kakimi, S. and Kojima, T. (1979). Synaptogenesis in the cervical cord of the human embryo: Sequence of synapse formation in a spinal reflex pathway. J Comp Neurol 184 , 491-517. doi:10.1002/cne.901840305
- Oulhote, Y. and Bouchard, M. F. (2013). Urinary metabolites of organophosphate and pyrethroid pesticides and behavioral problems in Canadian children. Environ Health Perspect 121 , 13781384. doi:10.1289/ehp.1306667
- Paolicelli, R. C. and Ferretti, M. T. (2017). Function and dysfunction  of  microglia  during  brain  development:  Consequences for synapses and neural circuits. Front Synaptic Neurosci 9 , 9. doi:10.3389/fnsyn.2017.00009
- Paparella,  M.,  Bennekou,  S.  H.  and  Bal-Price,  A.  (2020).  An analysis of the limitations and uncertainties of in vivo developmental neurotoxicity testing and assessment to identify the potential for alternative approaches. Reprod Toxicol 96 , 327-336. doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2020.08.002
- Pistollato,  F.,  Carpi,  D.,  Mendoza-de  Gyves,  E.  et  al.  (2021). Combining in vitro assays and mathematical modelling to study developmental neurotoxicity induced by chemical mixtures. Reprod Toxicol 105 , 101-119. doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2021.08.007
- Pitzer, E. M., Williams, M. T. and V orhees, C. V . (2021). Effects of pyrethroids on brain development and behavior: Deltamethrin. Neurotoxicol Teratol 87 , 106983. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2021.106983
- Radio, N. M., Breier, J. M., Shafer, T. J. et al. (2008). Assessment of chemical effects on neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells using high content screening. Toxicol Sci 105 , 106-118. doi:10.1093/toxsci/ kfn114
- Robinette, B. L., Harrill, J. A., Mundy, W. R. et al. (2011). In vitro assessment of developmental neurotoxicity: Use of microelectrode arrays to measure functional changes in neuronal network ontogeny. Front Neuroeng 4 ,  1-9. doi:10.3389/fneng.2011.00001
- Rodier, P. M. (1995). Developing brain as a target of toxicity. Environ  Health  Perspect  103,  Suppl  6 ,  73-76.  doi:10.1289/ehp. 95103s673
- Saavedra, L., Wallace, K., Freudenrich, T. F. et al. (2021). Comparison of acute effects of neurotoxic compounds on network activity in human and rodent neural cultures. Toxicol Sci 180 , 295-312. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfab008
- Sachana, M., Bal-Price, A., Crofton, K. M. et al. (2019). International regulatory and scientific effort for improved developmental  neurotoxicity  testing. Toxicol  Sci 167 ,  45-57.  doi:10.1093/ toxsci/kfy211
- Sagiv, S. K., Thurston, S. W., Bellinger, D. C. et al. (2010). Prenatal organochlorine exposure and behaviors associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in school-aged children. Am J Epidemiol 171 , 593-601. doi:10.1093/aje/kwp427
- Schmuck, M. R., Temme, T., Dach, K. et al. (2017). Omnisphero:

- A high-content image analysis (HCA) approach for phenotypic  developmental  neurotoxicity  (DNT)  screenings  of  organoid neurosphere cultures in vitro. Arch Toxicol 91 , 2017-2028. doi:10.1007/s00204-016-1852-2
- Seki, T. (2002). Expression patterns of immature neuronal markers  PSA-NCAM,  CRMP-4  and  NeuroD  in  the  hippocampus of young adult and aged rodents. J Neurosci Res 70 ,  327-334. doi:10.1002/jnr.10387
- Shafer, T. J., Rijal, S. O. and Gross, G. W. (2008). Complete inhibition  of  spontaneous  activity  in  neuronal  networks  in  vitro by deltamethrin and permethrin. Neurotoxicology 29 , 203-212. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2008.01.002
- Shafer, T. J. (2019). Application of microelectrode array approaches to neurotoxicity testing and screening. Adv Neurobiol 22 , 275297. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-11135-9\_12
- Sheets, L. P., Li, A. A., Minnema, D. J. et al. (2016). A critical review of neonicotinoid insecticides for developmental neurotoxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol 46 , 153-190. doi:10.3109/10408444.201 5.1090948
- Shelton, J. F., Geraghty, E. M., Tancredi, D. J. et al. (2014). Neurodevelopmental disorders and prenatal residential proximity to agricultural pesticides: The charge study. Environ Health Perspect 122 , 1103-1109. doi:10.1289/ehp.1307044
- Smirnova, L., Hogberg, H. T., Leist, M. et al. (2014). Food for thought  ...  Developmental  neurotoxicity  -  Challenges  in  the 21 st  century and in vitro opportunities. ALTEX 31 , 129-156. doi: 10.14573/altex.1403271
- Stern, M., Gierse, A., Tan, S. et al. (2014). Human Ntera2 cells as a predictive in vitro test system for developmental neurotoxicity. Arch Toxicol 88 , 127-136. doi:10.1007/S00204-013-1098-1
- Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M. et al. (2007). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell 131 , 861-872. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.019
- Tapia,  C.  M.,  Folorunso,  O.,  Singh, A.  K.  et  al.  (2020).  Effects of  deltamethrin  acute  exposure  on  Nav1.6  channels  and  medium spiny neurons of the nucleus accumbens. Toxicology 440 , 152488. doi:10.1016/j.tox.2020.152488
- Terron, A. and Bennekou, S. H. (2018). Towards a regulatory use of alternative developmental neurotoxicity testing (DNT). Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 354 , 19-23. doi:10.1016/j.taap.2018.02.002
- Toscano,  C.  D.  and  Guilarte,  T.  R.  (2005).  Lead  neurotoxicity: From exposure to molecular effects. Brain Res Rev 49 , 529-554. doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2005.02.004
- Tsuji, R. and Crofton, K. M. (2012). Developmental neurotoxicity guideline study: Issues with methodology, evaluation and regulation*. Congenit Anom (Kyoto) 52 , 122-128. doi:10.1111/J.17414520.2012.00374.X
- Tukker, A. M., Bouwman, L. M. S., van Kleef, R. G. D. M. et al. (2020a). Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) acutely affect human α1β2γ2L GABAA receptor and spontaneous neuronal network function in vitro. Sci Rep 10 , 5311. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-62152-2
- Tukker, A. M., Wijnolts, F. M. J., de Groot, A. et al. (2020b). Applicability of hiPSC-derived neuronal co-cultures and rodent primary cortical cultures for in vitro seizure liability assessment. Toxicol Sci 178 , 71-87. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfaa136
- Uhlhaas, P. and Singer, W. (2006). Neural synchrony in brain disorders: Relevance for cognitive dysfunctions and pathophysiology. Neuron 52 , 155-168. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2006.09.020
- U.S. EPA (1998). Health Effects Guidelines OPPTS 870.6300. Dev Neurotox Study EPA 71.
- Wagner-Schuman, M., Richardson, J. R., Auinger, P. et al. (2015). Association of pyrethroid pesticide exposure with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in a nationally representative sample of U.S. children. Environ Health 14 , 44. doi:10.1186/s12940-0150030-y
- Xue, Z., Li, X., Su, Q. et al. (2013). Effect of synthetic pyrethroid pesticide exposure during pregnancy on the growth and development of infants. Asia Pac J Public Health 25, Suppl 4 , 72S-79S. doi:10.1177/1010539513496267
- Zhang, L. I. and Poo, M. M. (2001). Electrical activity and development of neural circuits. Nat Neurosci 4,  Suppl ,  1207-1214. doi:10.1038/NN753
- Zhang, R., Zhang, H., Chen, B. et al. (2020). Fetal bovine serum attenuating perfluorooctanoic acid-inducing toxicity to multiple human  cell  lines  via  albumin  binding. J  Hazard  Mater 389 , 122109. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122109
- Zhang, Y., Xu, Y.-Y., Sun, W.-J. et al. (2016). FBS or BSA inhibits EGCG  induced  cell  death  through  covalent  binding  and  the reduction of intracellular ROS production. Biomed Res Int 2016 , 5013409. doi:10.1155/2016/5013409

<!-- image -->

## Conflict of interest

KB, AD,  and  EF  are  shareholders  of  the  company  DNTOX, which  provides  DNT  IVB  assay  services,  and  DH,  CN,  JW, and PZ have been or are currently employed by NeuCyte Inc., a company that commercially distributes the iN:glia co-culture described in this study, and all declare no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research in this article. FB and EK have no conflict of interest to declare.

## Funding

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Danish  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  under  grant  number  MST-667-00205, and  the  Horizon  Europe  project  PARC  (Grant Agreement  No 101057014).

## Data availability

The dataset generated during and/or analyzed during the current study is available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.