<!-- image -->
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
 ## Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/colsurfb
 ## Investigation on the interaction of pyrethroid pesticides to estrogen receptor alpha through computational and experimental methods
 Caiwei Hu, Leng Wang, Yuhao Ma, Zhiyou Xu, Huizhe Lu
 *
 Department of Chemistry, College of Science, China Agricultural University, No. 2 West Yuanmingyuan Road, Beijing 100193, PR China
 ## A R T I C L E  I N F O
 Keywords: Pyrethroid insecticides Zebrafish estrogen receptor alpha Homology modeling Molecular docking
 Molecular dynamics simulations
 ## 1. Introduction
 Pyrethroid insecticides are a kind of bio-mimetic synthetic pesticides synthesized based on natural pyrethrins. They are widely used in agricultural production because of their high efficiency, broad spectrum, low toxicity and easy degradation [1]. However, with the extensive use of  pyrethroid  pesticides,  the  population  exposure  risk  level  is  also increasing gradually. Timothy [2] found that pyrethroids had an accumulation effect in nerve cells in vitro. There were also some studies revealed that pyrethroids could be detected in human breast milk [3] and  urine  [4].  These  indicate  that  even  if  the  pyrethroid  residues detected in the environment are under maximum residue limit, they can accumulate in human body and eventually cause toxicity and side effects through various exposure approaches including dietary and non dietary ways, such as skin absorption system, respiratory system and digestive system [5]. As was shown in Ravula ' s research, although the dose was
 ## A B S T R A C T
 Pyrethroid insecticides are a group of widely used bio-mimetic synthetic pesticides. However, recent studies reported that they could have an accumulation effect in human which may cause series of health problems. Estrogen receptors (ER) are a class of nuclear receptors that are vital in proper physiological behavior of estrogens. To investigate the reproductive toxicity of pyrethroids, homology modeling, molecular docking, molecular dynamic simulations (MDs) were conducted to explore the interaction between pyrethroids and ER α from atomic scale. The human ER α (2YJA) was selected as a template protein for homology modeling. Then eight typical  pyrethroids  and  positive  control  estradiol  were  docked  to  the  modeled  protein.  The  highest  scoring bifenthrin and the lowest scoring permethrin were chosen for in-depth analysis. MDs showed that the complex formed by permethrin with ER α had a lower RMSD value and binding free energies compared to bifenthrin. Based on these results from microscopic dimension, exposure experiments were implemented to validate the primary conclusions. VTG concentrations in male zebrafish ' s blood were significantly higher under permethrin exposure than bifenthrin, suggesting a stronger estrogenic activity and binding propensity. In this regard, the structural characteristics of molecules were analyzed, expecting to provide theoretical references for subsequent drug design and rational drug application.
 far more lower than the residual level in the food, long-term exposure to pyrethroids would cause serious damage to the general physiological process  and  reproductive  function  [6].  Therefore,  researches  on  the interaction of pyrethroid pesticides with important proteins in humans are significant for further understanding the toxicity of pyrethroid pesticides to humans and for scientific guidance on pesticide use.
 In recent years, many studies have shown the reproductive toxicity of pyrethroids. Sun [7] reported that cyhalothrin, cypermethrin and deltamethrin exhibited some estrogenic activity at certain concentrations, while their metabolite 3-PAB had distinct anti-estrogenic activity. Ru [8]  investigated  the  reproductive  toxicity  and  estrogenic  activity  of pyrethroids  by  fish  screening  in  vivo  and  found  that  metsulfenthrin, cyhalothrin,  cypermethrin  and  deltamethrin  had  potential  environmental estrogenic activity. Go [9] further demonstrated the estrogenic activity of pyrethroids on the basis of the phenomenon that pyrethroids could stimulate the proliferation of MCF-7 cells, implying its ability to
 Abbreviations: ER, Estrogen receptors; MDs, Molecular dynamics simulations; MDM, Molecular docking method; GAFF, General Amber force field; PME, Particle Mesh Ewald; MM-PBSA, Molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area; Vtg, Vitellogenin; RMSD, Root Mean Square Deviation; RMSF, Root Mean Square Fluctuation.
 * Correspondence to: Department of Applied Chemistry, China Agricultural University, No. 2 West Yuanmingyuan Road, Beijing 100193, PR China. E-mail addresses: 2018307020120@cau.edu.cn (C. Hu), wangleng@cau.edu.cn (L. Wang), Bao\_bao\_ma@163.com (Y. Ma), 3205818146@qq.com (Z. Xu), luhz@ cau.edu.cn (H. Lu).
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;UGLYPH&lt;0&gt;HGLYPH&lt;0&gt;VGLYPH&lt;0&gt;HGLYPH&lt;0&gt;UGLYPH&lt;0&gt;YGLYPH&lt;0&gt;HGLYPH&lt;0&gt;GGLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;17&gt;
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;20&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;25&gt;
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GGLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;19&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;μ
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;20&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;20&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;24&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;25&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;24&gt;
 <!-- image -->
 <!-- image -->
 bond with the ER. As is broadly confirmed, women ' s reproductive health is closely related to estrogen, but research on the effects of pyrethroids on it is still limited. So it is necessary to conduct relevant studies.
 Human nuclear receptor superfamily is one of the largest families of transcription factors with a total of 48 members [10] and they have been identified as potential.
 pharmaceutical targets for treating several metabolic disorders [11]. Estrogen receptors (ER) are a group of nuclear receptors located in the nucleus of cells that mediate the genotypic effects of estrogen and are vital for the normal physiological effects of estrogen. In addition, studies have shown that ER is also involved in the regulation and maintenance of memory functions in the hippocampus of the central nervous system [12], the regulation of cardiovascular functions such as blood pressure and cardioprotection [13], the regulation of multifunctional haematopoietic stem cell differentiation [14], etc. It is evident that the ER plays an essential role in the metabolic activities of the human body and that the  combination  of  pyrethroid  pesticides  with  the  ER  will  have  an impact on the normal physiological activity of the ER.
 As a model organism, zebrafish has been fully sequenced and its genome is highly homologous to the human genome, sharing similar neural  and  metabolic  systems  and  many  physiological  traits  with human.  With  these  backgrounds  mentioned  above,  we  have  used computational chemistry methods such as homology modeling, molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations (MDs) to theoretically predict and analyse the interaction between pyrethroid pesticides and the zebrafish ER α .  Then, on this basis we have carried out bio-assay experiments on zebrafish in order to further determine the binding of the molecules and the protein through the different VTG level of their blood, and to lay a foundation for further understanding of the estrogenic activity and the mechanism of action of pyrethroid pesticides.
 ## 2. Materials and methods
 ## 2.1. Homology modeling
 Protein homology modeling is based on the concept of homologous proteins. Generally speaking, when the template protein is with over 60% homology to target protein, the 3D model we derived is accurate [15]. Once the model is generated, the accuracy of the model can be assessed  through  Ramachandran  plots  generated  by  PROCHECK, ERRAT, VERIFY-3D, etc. Since no crystal structure of zebrafish ER α has been reported in the PDB, the 3D structure of zebrafish ER α was obtained through homology modeling.
 First, the protein sequence of zebrafish ER alpha (AAK16740.1) was retrieved  from  NCBI  database  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/).  Second, it was submitted to BLAST (https:// blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast. cgi) to find a proper template. The PDB database was used for identifying a segment of homologous protein with a high degree of homology to it. The total score, similarity and homology of the search results were all taken into consider. Finally, 2YJA was selected as the template protein with 62.06% homology and 44% sequence coverage with zebrafish ER α .  Then,  an  automated  mode  of  SWISS-MODEL  (https://www.sw issmodel.expasy.org) was performed for homology  modeling  the zebrafish ER α ( Fig. S1). Lastly, the model was evaluated with SAVES. In addition, as estrogen receptors β has a similar structure to ER α [16], to further ensure the selectivity of the interaction between molecules and ER α , ER β was simultaneously homology modeled based on its template protein 1L2J for subsequent docking calculations.
 ## 2.2. Molecular docking
 The Molecular Docking Method (MDM) is designed on the basis of the  "lock-and-key"  principle.  It  predicts  the  mechanism  of  receptorligand interaction through chemometric methods, which enables accurate prediction of protein receptor ' s binding sites and its binding modes [17].
 According  to  the  usage  of  pyrethroid  pesticides,  we  selected permethrin, cypermethrin, methrin, cyfluthrin, fenpropathrin, ethofenprox, prallethrin and bifenthrin for study (Fig. S2). Estradiol was used as a positive control. Surflex-Dock program of Sybyl-x 2.0 was used for docking to predict whether these pyrethroid pesticides were potential ligands of the zebrafish ER. Before docking, the modeled protein was pre-treated by removing water molecules and adding polar hydrogen atoms  and  charges.  As  there  was  no  ligand  in  the  modeled  protein, automatic mode was chosen to generate the Protomol with empirical scoring  functions.  The  volume  of  the  Protomol  and  the  degree  of embedding in  the  receptor  could  be  determined  by  two  parameters, threshold and bloat, which were set to 0.45 and 0, while the other parameters were set to default values. Since the structure of the ligand is flexible, Surflex-Dock can generate 100 docking conformations for each ligand and select the most likely bioactive conformation as the final conformation for further study. The ultimate Total Score is the criterion for assessing the reliability of docking. According to the SYBYL manual, when the docking score is greater than 4, there is an interaction between the receptor and the ligand. Prior to docking, each small molecule has been optimized in the MM94 force field. After the first round of docking, the  highest  and  lowest  scoring  molecules  were  selected  for  further docking with ER β to exclude non-selective binding.
 ## 2.3. Molecular dynamics simulations
 Molecular  dynamics  simulations  (MDs)  can  provide  high  spatial resolution  information  and  high  temporal  resolution  structural  dynamics information, which is crucial for grasping the microstructure of receptors and their kinetic information [18].
 In this experiment, Amber 14 was used to investigate the stability of the complexes and the kinetic behaviour of the ligands through MDs. Based on the molecular docking results, the highest scoring bifenthrin and  the  lowest  scoring  permethrin  were  selected  and  their  docking models with ER α were used as the initial structures for in-depth study.
 The  small  molecule  ligands  were  pre-processed  using  the  ANTECHAMBER  module.  Energy  minimization  was  performed  with  HF/ 6 -31G* basis set in Gaussian 16 program [19]. The missing hydrogen atoms were filled in the Tleap program. The force field parameters for the protein were taken from the Amber ff03 force field [20] and that for the ligands were taken from the general Amber force field (GAFF) [21]. The initial model of the complex was placed in an truncated octahedral statistical system with a 10 Å layer of TIP3P water molecules added to mimic the solvent and Na + was added to neutralize the system. Then, the  whole system was optimized using the SANDER program with a binding  constant  of  200  kcal ⋅ mol GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 1 ⋅ Å GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 2 for  5000  steps  of  maximum descent [22]. Then 5000 steps of conjugate gradient optimization were carried out under unrestrained binding conditions to minimize the energy  of  the  system.  The  system  temperature  was  then  gradually increased from 10 K to 310 K in 100 ps using Langevin kinetics. Fifty ns of molecular dynamics calculations were performed for the whole system  at  thermodynamic  temperature  (T = 310  K,  101  kPa)  with  an integration step of 2 fs. For each 500 fs, a molecular conformation was collected  and  saved  to  the  results  file.  During  the  simulations,  the SHAKE method was used to confine the hydrogen atoms and the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method was used to calculate the electrostatic energy [23].
 ## 2.4. Free energy calculations
 Molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) is a method for calculating free energy based on samples collected from molecular  dynamics  trajectories  that  combines  molecular  mechanics with a continuum media model [24]. In this study, we selected 5000 frames of each ligand, receptor and complex conformation in the last 5 ns  of  the  equilibrium  phase  and  analyzed  them  with  MMPBSA.py module of Amber 14. The calculation equations are as follows.
 ``` ( 1 ) ΔG = ΔGGAS + ΔGsolv GLYPH<0> TΔS ( 2 ) ΔGGAS = ΔEINT + ΔEVDW + ΔEELE ( 3 ) ΔEINT = ΔEbonds + ΔEangels + ΔEdihedrals ```
 Among them, ΔG GAS is the mechanical free energy of the gas molecules, which contains internal energy Δ EINT , van der Waals interactions Δ EVDW and electrostatic interactions Δ EELE .  The internal energy Δ EINT includes bond energy Δ Ebonds , bond angle energy Δ Eangels and dihedral angle energy Δ Edihedrals . Δ Gsolv is the solvation free energy, which can be subdivided into polarization energy Δ GPB and non-polarization energy Δ GSA . T Δ S refers  to  the  entropic  change.  Since  the  entropy  change during translation, rotation and vibration had little effect on the binding free energy, it was neglected in this study.
 Additionally,  to  further  investigate  the  interaction  between  key amino  acid  residues  and  ligands,  the  decomposed  energy  value contributed by each key amino acid residue were calculated through MM-PBSA method. The last 5 ns of the equilibrium MD trajectory was also selected for the analysis.
 ## 2.5. Fish and chemical exposure
 For environmental estrogenic pollutants, the typical action mechanism is to act as a ligand to bind to the ER and regulate the transcriptional  process  of  the  responding  genes  through  estrogen  response elements [25]. Studies have shown that the expression of ERs genes can be significantly upregulated in the liver in response to estrogen [26], thus ERs genes can serve as typical biomarkers for the detection of estrogenic activity in organisms. Besides this, vitellogenin (VTG), a yolk precursor  protein  synthesised  in  the  liver,  has  also  been  used  as  a biomarker for the analysis of estrogen activity in animals such as fish. Adult male zebrafish can synthesize VTG after the induction of exogenous estrogen [27] and the transcription of mRNA for the VTG gene will also be significantly up-regulated [28]. As ER α may act as the principal subtype in regulating VTG, which can act directly on the expression of the VTG gene and they are expressed in a time-dose-dependent manner, we  can  monitor  the  binding  of  pyrethroid  pesticides  with  ER α by measuring the amount of VTG [29]. There are seven forms of VTG genes in the zebrafish genome, known as VTG 1 to VTG 7, of which VTG 1 is the most expressed and accounts for the absolute majority of its content. Therefore, VTG 1 is an important gene for the study of estrogenic effects [30].
 ## 2.5.1. Experimental materials
 Permethrin (Purity &gt; 95%, CAS:52645 -53 -1, purchased from Hubei Yongkua Technology Ltd.); Bifenthrin (Purity &gt; 95%, CAS: 82657 -04 -3, offered by Bioassay Office, College of Science, China Agricultural University);  Zebrafish VTG ELISA kit (purchased from Shanghai Enzyme Link  Biotechnology  Ltd.);  AB-type  male  zebrafish  (purchased  from Gaofeng Aquarium, Beijing). The experimental stock solution was prepared with acetone at a concentration of 10 mg/L and stored at 4 ℃ away from light for backup.
 ## 2.5.2. Pesticide exposure experiments
 Here the model organism zebrafish were chosen for further investigation of the interaction of pyrethroid pesticides with the ER α .
 The zebrafish were domesticated for 2 weeks before the experiment to eliminate the effects of endogenous steroids produced by the male zebrafish themselves. Male zebrafish (AB-type) were kept in 5 L beakers (with 15 L of continuously aerated dechlorinated tap water at 25 ± 1 ◦ C, pH  7.4 ± 0.3  and  dissolved  oxygen  6.5 ± 0.2 mg/L)  for  a  fortnight under a 14:10 h light-dark cycle and fed twice daily with a mixed diet. Their natural mortality should be less than 5%.
 After the acclimation period, 4 L of test solution at concentrations of 0,  100,  300  and  900 ng/L  were  prepared  per  day  using  continuous aerated  dechlorinated  tap  water.  Male  zebrafish  were  exposed  to different concentrations of permethrin and bifenthrin test solutions and three replicate experiments were set up for each concentration. Ensure that the concentration of acetone was less than 0.0025% (v / v). Each tank contained 10 male zebrafish. Culture for 15 days with the same photoperiod and temperature conditions as the acclimation period. Test solutions were changed daily to ensure accurate exposure concentrations each day. Feed 0.5 g of dry bait daily. At the end of the exposure period, we collected blood for further study.
 ## 2.5.3. Measurement of plasma VTG protein
 After exposure experiments, blood was drawn from zebrafish tails into 1.5 mL centrifuge tubes. The blood sample was then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min and the upper plasma layer was stored at GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 20 ◦ C for testing. Using the zebrafish VTG ELISA kit (Shanghai EnzymeLink Biotechnology Ltd), VTG levels in zebrafish were measured according to the instructions. Each sample contained blood samples from 10 zebrafish,  and  three  parallel  sets  were  set  up  for  each  concentration.  The purified zebrafish VTG (30, 60, 120, 240, 480 μ g/ L) provided in the kit was utilized as a standard and the concentration of VTG in the plasma samples could be calculated from the linear portion of the zebrafish VTG standard curve. The results of the VTG concentration provided a direct indication of the magnitude of the effect of the pesticide molecule on the ER α .
 ## 3. Results and discussion
 ## 3.1. Homology modeling
 We chose human ER α (2YJA) as the template protein for homology modeling, whose homology and similarity to zebrafish ER α were 62.06% and  44%  respectively.  After  using  the  automated  mode  of  SWISSMODEL to  derive  the  model  protein,  this  resulting  model  was  then evaluated by SAVES. PROCHECK was carried out based on the PDB highresolution crystal structure parameters, which in turn gave a series of stereochemical parameters for the submitted model. The Ramachandran plots generated can be used to examine the distribution of Φ -dihedral angles in the zebrafish ER α backbone conformation so as to identify the structural plausibility of the protein. As shown in the Fig. S3A, 95.5% of the amino acids of the model protein are located in the core region, 4.1% in the allowed region, 0.5% in the maximum allowed region and no amino acids in the forbidden region. In general, when more than 90% of the amino acids are located in the core region, the modeled protein can be considered as a high quality model, i.e. the angles formed between the residues of the modeled protein are reasonable. ERRAT is an indicator to evaluate the reasonableness of the protein geometry by finding the  non-bonding  interactions  between  different  pairs  of  atom  types within 0.35 nm. Generally when the ERRAT score exceeds 50, the protein structure is reasonable. The zebrafish ER α model we built had an ERRAT-score of 98.2379, well above the threshold. VERIFY-3D compares the model tertiary structure with the amino acid primary structure and is used to assess the consistency of the two. When the number of residues with a 3D/1D value of 0.2 is greater than 80%, the protein model passes. The results showed that a total of 82.99% of amino acid residues scored more than 0.2 in VERIFY-3D (Fig. S4A). After the evaluation  of  Ramachandran  plot,  ERRAT  and  VERIFY-3D,  it  could  be proved  that  the  structure  of  zebrafish  ER α obtained  by  homology modeling was reasonable and reliable and could be used for the subsequent analysis.
 Moreover, zebrafish ER β has 62.06% sequence homology and 44% coverage to its template (1L2J). Its model ' s ERRAT-score was 98.96. The Ramachandran plot was shown in Fig.S3B . The results of VERIFY-3D were  shown  in  Fig.S4B,  where  amino  acid  residues  with  a  score greater than 0.2 accounted for 85.12%. From these results it can be seen that the structure of the modeled ER β was also credible.
 ## 3.2. Molecular docking
 On  the  basis  of  the  proteins  obtained  in  the  previous  homology modeling  step,  we  generated  the  active  pockets  through  Automatic Mode of Sybyl-x 2.0. Several possible pocket sites were then derived through simulations with POCASA 1.1 and a ranking evaluation was given (Fig. S5). The results were visualised in the Pymol software as shown (Fig.  S6).  It  could  be  seen  that  the  highest  ranked  pocket  in POCASA was cavity 126, consistent with the actual docked active pocket with the typical deep, narrow characteristics, whereas the other pockets were significantly shallower or less spacious. The Surflex-Dock program was then run to flexibly dock a series of optimized pyrethroid pesticides to the modeled zebrafish ER α . The scoring results are shown in Table 1, and the docking pattern is plotted in Fig. S7. The scoring module uses four empirical scoring functions to evaluate the binding of the receptor to the ligand from different perspectives such as polar interaction, hydrophobic entropy and solvation. A total score is obtained by aggregating each function, which indicates the affinity of the ligand to the receptor. Typically, a Total score greater than 4 is regarded as a valid docking of the ligand to the receptor. Crash indicates the extent to which the ligand penetrates the protein preferably close to 0. Polar indicates the ability of an atom to form a hydrogen bond where a positive value means a strong hydrogen bonding ability and vice versa. The positive compound estradiol received the highest score, which was consistent with the objective fact, indicating that the docking result was relatively reliable. Based on these docking scores, it could be seen that the docking scores of fenpropathrin, bifenthrin, permethrin and prallethrin with the ER α were greater than 4, suggesting a valid docking, i.e. they were able to  interact  with  the  zebrafish  ER α as  ligands,  theoretically  demonstrating that these pyrethroid pesticides were potential environmental estrogens. At the same time, bifenthrin and permethrin both had a lower docking score with ER β (see Table S1 . ), indicating a selective interaction with ER α . As seen in the docking pattern diagram, for pesticide molecules with different structures, the conformation of their docking into the  pocket  also  differed,  thus  affecting  the  degree  of  binding,  which further exhibited the influence of compound structure on properties.
 To further explore the effect of the binding pattern of the receptor and  ligand  on  the  docking  scoring  results,  we  selected  the  highest scoring bifenthrin and the lowest scoring permethrin for analysis. The docking pattern of bifenthrin to the zebrafish ER can be seen in the Fig. 1A, where the entire ligand molecule was deeply bound in the receptor protein in a U-shaped conformation. The carbonyl oxygen on the ester group of the ligand formed a hydrogen bond with the NH on the imidazole  group  of  HIS-217  at  a  distance  of  2.2 Å.  In  addition,  the benzene ring portion of the ligand formed a T-shaped π -π stacking with the benzene ring of PHE-97. The rest of the structure of the ligand was largely  surrounded  by  hydrophobic  residues  such  as  MET,  ILE,  LEU, PHE, ALA, TRP with a few polar residues like GLY, THR, GLU. The ligand was  anchored  in  the  protein  pocket  under  hydrophobic  interactions. From the Fig. 1B, the docking pattern of permethrin can be observed. The permethrin molecule also formed a T-shaped π -π stacking with the benzene ring of PHE-97. Its dichloromethyl portion might have a polar
 Table 1 Docking results of pyrethroid pesticides with zebrafish estrogen receptor α
 .
 | NAME          | molecular docking   | molecular docking   | molecular docking   | |---------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------| |               | Total score         | Crash               | Polar               | | Fenpropathrin | 6.3044              | -5.3086             | 0.0107              | | Cypermethrin  | -0.0552             | -11.2982            | 0.0104              | | Methrin       | 0.5483              | -11.1207            | 0.0069              | | Bifenthrin    | 6.5208              | -6.7326             | 0.6316              | | Cyfluthrin    | 3.1854              | -8.3436             | 0.0000              | | Permethrin    | 4.5563              | -6.2990             | 0.0046              | | Ethofenprox   | 3.1651              | -7.1104             | 0.4030              | | Prallethrin   | 6.1873              | -3.3417             | 0.0000              | | Estradiol     | 6.9175              | -2.7538             | 2.4481              |
 interaction with surrounding THR-40 and GLY-214, which might have led to a shift in the molecular backbone, making it impossible for the carbonyl  oxygen  to  form  hydrogen  bonds  with  the  NH  of  HIS-217 anymore.  The  entire  molecule  did  not  form  any  hydrogen  bonds, which  is  consistent  with  the  Polar  values  resulting  from  molecular docking.
 The  superimposition  of  the  conformations  of  the  two  molecules (Fig. 1C) suggested that bifenthrin and permethrin were bent in opposite directions in the docking pocket, which resulted in a difference in the type of protein residues interacting with each molecule that led to a significant difference in the mode of action. According to the docking results, hydrogen bonding interactions probably played a major role in the binding process and influenced the scoring results to a large extent. Specifically, the main reason for the difference in docking orientation might be related to the type of polar group and the form of benzene ring present in the molecule. According to the above analysis, the differences in the polar groups were responsible for the different electrostatic interactions with the surrounding residues, which indirectly influenced the interaction of the other groups (carbonyl groups) with the residues, ultimately leading to significant differences in the overall magnitude of the effect. This means that when designing novel drugs in the future, we need to take into account not  only  the  interaction  of  key  functional groups with residues, but also the impact of other structures, such as polar groups, on the positioning of the entire drug molecule in the active pocket.
 ## 3.3. Molecular dynamics simulations
 To further verify the reliability of the molecular docking results and the  stability  of  the  complexes,  we  conducted  MDs  for  50 ns  on  the complexes of bifenthrin and permethrin with zebrafish ER and got the Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) of the main chain atoms and the Root Mean Square Fluctuation (RMSF) of the amino acid residues of the two complex systems. It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the RMSD values of the permethrin complex gradually converge to equilibrium after 20 ns, which means that the system has reached a balanced state. In contrast, the RMSD of the bifenthrin complex remained in a fluctuating situation throughout the simulation, which implies that the stability of the complex  is  not  satisfactory.  It  can  also  be  seen  that  the  RMSD  of  the permethrin complex was lower than that of the bifenthrin complex for the  majority  of  the  simulation,  suggesting  a  greater  stability  of  the permethrin complex. Although the results of the MDs contradict with the scores of molecular docking, it actually illustrates the ligand-receptor interaction  from  another  perspective.  Molecular  docking  focuses  on discussing parameters such as the type of forces and binding sites during static binding between ligand and receptor, whereas MDs focus more on the dynamics of the whole system, emphasizing energy minimization during the movement rather than at a specific moment in time. Though the conformational stability of the bifenthrin complex is higher than that of permethrin under the set parameters, the energy of the system may exhibit larger fluctuations as the conformation of the protein and small molecule changes during the movement, resulting in a lower stability of the overall dynamics compared to permethrin. The actual combination situation has to be proved by subsequent exposure experiments.
 In  order  to  understand  the  flexibility  of  the  molecular  docking complexes and the partial motion characteristics of their structures in more detail, we calculated the RMSF values of the amino acid residues of the receptor during MDs. The higher the value, the more flexible the complex is during the binding process. As shown in Fig. 3, the RMSF values of the different amino acid residues are roughly the same for both complex systems due to the same active pockets docked by the small molecules.  Both  systems  showed  a  larger  RMSD  fluctuation  around residues 25, 160 and 230, which might be associated with the stability of complex formation, while the valleys were basically around residues 50, 80, 140 and 180, implying that they might belong to conservative regions.  Further  comparison  revealed  that  the  RMSF  of  the  bifenthrin
 Fig. 1. (A-B) Docking pattern of bifenthrin and permethrin with the zebrafish estrogen receptor α . (C) Overlay of the docking pattern of the two. (Green stick bifenthrin. Blue stick - permethrin. Residues within 5 Å of the ligand were showed as lines in lightblue.).
 <!-- image -->
 Fig. 2. Variation of the RMSD of the main chain atoms in bifenthrin complex and permethrin complex.
 <!-- image -->
 Fig. 3. The RMSF  of  amino  acid residues in bifenthrin  complex  and permethrin complex.
 <!-- image -->
 complex  system  was  generally  higher  than  that  of  the  permethrin complex overall, and it displayed a significantly higher RMSF near residue 50, indicating that most of the amino acid residues of the bifenthrin complex system were at a higher degree of freedom and were less stable throughout the kinetic process.
 In addition, the stabilized conformations of the complexes of bifenthrin  and  permethrin  were extracted  separately after  50 ns  MDs and were  analyzed  in  superposition  with  the  respective  initial  complex conformations. As shown in Fig. 4A, bifenthrin experienced a nearly 180 ◦ conformational  inversion  in  the  active  pocket,  resulting  in  the disruption of its hydrogen bonding interaction with HIS-217 and its π -π stacking effect on PHE-97. Furthermore, the entire protein backbone also underwent a large shift. All of these implied that the stability of the bifenthrin complex was damaged to a rather high extent. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 4B, permethrin only experienced a flip of approximately 90 ◦ , and after 50 ns of simulation, the surrounding key amino acids were still  basically  within  the  range  of  5 Å,  allowing  the  whole  system  to remain generally stable. The above analyzes also reinforced the results of the MD calculations.
 ## 3.4. Binding free energy calculations
 For better understanding of the mechanism of action between the ligand and the receptor, we calculated the binding free energy and the energy components of bifenthrin and permethrin with the zebrafish ER
 based on the Amber 14 and MM-PBSA methods and selected the last 5 ns trajectories of the equilibrium phase for analysis as shown in Table 2. Generally speaking, the smaller the value of the binding free energy, the higher the affinity of the ligand and the more stable the binding to the receptor. It could be seen that the binding free energy of bifenthrin to the receptor  was GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 35.66 kcal/mol  compared  to GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 38.61 kcal/mol  for permethrin, indicating that the binding of permethrin was much more stable,  which  was  consistent  with  the  RMSD  results.  This  result  was probably related to the greater number of polar amino acid residues around  the  permethrin  which  generated  a  stronger  van  der  Waals interaction. Though the trifluoromethyl group of bifenthrin, as a polar group,  might  also  generate  electrostatic  forces  with  the  surrounding polar amino acids, this interaction obviously did not contribute as much as  the  van  der  Waals  interaction  to  the  overall  binding  free  energy, which was also evident from the energy components. In both systems, van der Waals forces served as the main driving force for ligand binding, electrostatic  interaction  and  non-polar  solvation  also  made  some contribution to the stability of binding, while polar solvent solvation was the main inhibitory force for binding.
 ## 3.5. Decomposition free energy calculations
 In this study, we used the MM-PBSA method to calculate the energy contribution of individual amino acid residues in the 5 Å range of the ligand using Amber 14, in order to investigate the energy contribution of each key amino acid residue in the binding process in depth. The results are presented in Table S2-S3 and Fig. 5. For the permethrin complex, the amino acids with high binding free energy contributions were LEU-39, LEU-77,  MET-81,  LEU-218,  PHE-97,  LEU-80,  ILE-117,  TRP-76,  GLY214 and ALA-43, all of which appeared to be correspond to the valleys of the RMSF image, i.e. they were in the conserved regions of the protein, consistent with the previous analysis. consistent with the previous analysis. As shown from the energy components, the forces between the amino acid residues and the ligand were essentially in the form of van der Waals forces and followed by electrostatic interactions.
 ## 3.6. Exposure experiments
 To determine the binding of pesticides to ER α more visually and to further assess the estrogenic effects of different pyrethroid pesticides, we exposed male zebrafish to pesticides for 15 days at test solution concentrations of 0, 100, 300 and 900 ng/L of bifenthrin or permethrin respectively.  The  final  results  of  their  blood  VTG  concentrations measured are shown in Fig. 6. It could be found that both pesticides showed a certain amount of estrogenic activity, causing a significant increase in the blood VTG concentration, and the estrogenic activity increased continuously with the increasing concentration of the exposed pesticide within the experimental range. The higher estrogeno-mimetic activity shown by permethrin under the same concentration conditions might also indicate a better binding of permethrin to the ER, which was in accordance with the results of MDs.
 Apart from this, we also found that the higher the exposed pesticide concentration,  the  greater  the  motility  of  the  male  zebrafish,  whose liveliness  was  significantly  stronger  than  that  of  the  blank  control. However, the exact mechanism of this is unclear.
 ## 4. Conclusion
 In this research, we investigated the interactions of representative pyrethroid  pesticides  with  the  zebrafish  ER  by  means  of  homology modeling,  molecular  docking,  MDs,  binding  and  decomposition  free energy calculations, and exposure experiments. Through computational simulations, we found that there is indeed a non-negligible interaction between pyrethroid pesticides and the zebrafish estrogen receptor at an atomic level. In order to investigate the interaction in more detail, we selected the molecules with the highest and lowest molecular docking
 Table 2
 <!-- image -->
 Binding free energy and energy components (kcal/mol).
 | Energy   |   Bifenthrin |   Permethrin | |----------|--------------|--------------| | ELE      |        -2.26 |        -1.36 | | VDW      |       -48.5  |       -50.06 | | INT      |        -0    |         0    | | GAS      |       -50.76 |       -51.42 | | SUR      |        -6.62 |        -6.62 | | CAL      |        21.72 |        19.42 | | SOL      |        15.1  |        12.81 | | TOT      |       -35.66 |       -38.61 |
 Note: ELE is electrostatic energy; VDW is van der Waals energy; INT includes bond, bond angle and dihedral angle energied; GAS is the sum of these three energies; SUR is non-polar solvation energy; CAL is polar solvation energy; SOL is the sum of SUR and CAL, including both of the solvation energies; TOT is total binding  free  energy.  All  of  the  results  were  carried  out  through  MM-PBSA methods.
 scores, i. e. bifenthrin and permethrin, for further study. By analyzing the  conformation  of  the  docking  complexes,  we  concluded  that  the magnitude of the interaction between molecules and proteins is mainly
 Fig.  4. Overlay of  the  docking  pattern  of  the primary  complex  conformation  and  the  final stabilized  complex  conformation  of  bifenthrin (A)  and  permethrin  (B).  (Green  stick  -  bifenthrin in final conformation. Blue stick -permethrin in final conformation. White stick corresponding  molecule  in  primary  conformation. Lightorange cartoon -  ER α in final conformation. White cartoon - ER α in primary conformation. Residues within 5 Å of the ligand were showed as lines in lightblue.).(For interpretation  of  the  references  to  colour  in  this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
 related to the type of functional groups and framework structure of the molecules.  Subsequently,  MDs  based  on  the  Amber14  program  were carried out and it ' s showed that the binding of permethrin to the ER was more stable. This result, although different from the docking result, may indicate that the dynamic stability of the bifenthrin complex is inferior to  that  of  permethrin,  meaning  that  although  the  binding  energy  of bifenthrin is lower in a given case, the fluctuation of its system energy may be greater throughout its movement as the protein, small molecule conformation  changes,  leading  to  a  decrease  in  its  overall  dynamic stability. Furthermore, calculations of the free energy using the MMPBSA  module  also suggested that the binding stability of the permethrin  was  better.  Moreover,  it  was  evident  from  the  energy breakdown that van der Waals forces were the main driving force for ligand binding in both systems, while polar solvent solventisation was the main inhibiting force for binding. To further examine and determine the binding of the two complex systems, zebrafish exposure experiments were conducted on the basis of the above. The results showed that both pesticides had some estrogenic activity and that this activity was positively  correlated  with  the  pesticide  concentration.  The  activity  of permethrin was higher than that of bifenthrin, that is, the reproductive toxicity  of  permethrin  is  higher  than  that  of  bifenthrin,  and  if  it
 Fig. 5. Energy contribution of key amino acid residues within 5 Å of bifenthrin complex (A) and permethrin complex (B).
 <!-- image -->
 Fig. 6. VTG concentrations of blood in male zebrafish after 15 days of exposure in bifenthrin and permethrin at a concentrate of 0, 100, 300, 900 ng/L.
 <!-- image -->
 accumulates in the organism, it is more harmful at the same concentration conditions. Also, this result implies that the predictions of MDs are more reliable than molecular docking in a process involving dynamic changes,  as  molecular  dynamics  do  not  only  consider  the  binding characteristics in a certain state, but also integrate the binding conditions at each steps of movement. However, it is undeniable that MDs are far less efficient than molecular docking in terms of time cost. Therefore molecular docking still occupies an irreplaceable position in the early stages of drug design, and discussing the outcomes of molecular docking is  still  an  important  way  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  this  process. Overall, we hope that through this research, we can provide some insights for the subsequent related drug discovery on structure design, and can also  provide  some  theoretical  basis  for  the  rational  use  of  these pyrethroid pesticides.
 ## CRediT authorship contribution statement
 Caiwei  Hu: Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing -original draft, Writing -review &amp; editing, Visualization. Leng Wang : Software, Methodology. Yuhao Ma: Investigation. Zhiyou Xu: Investigation. Huizhe Lu : Validation, Writing -review &amp; editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Project administration.
 ## Declaration of Competing Interest
 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
 ## Acknowledgement
 This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, China (grant number 21873115).
 ## Appendix A. Supporting information
 Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.colsurfb.2022.112565.
 ## References
 - [1] X. Li, The R &amp; D and market profile of the pyrethroid insecticides, Agrochemicals 55 (2016) 625 -630.
- [2] T.J. Shafer, M.F. Hughes, Accumulation of pyrethroid compounds in primary cultures from rat cortex, Toxicol. Vitr. 24 (2010) 2053 -2057.
- [3] B. Sereda, H. Bouwman, H. Kylin, Comparing water, bovine milk, and indoor residual spraying as possible sources of DDT and pyrethroid residues in breast milk, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health Part A: Curr. Issues 72 (2009) 842 -851.
- [4] Y. Xia, Y. Han, B. Wu, S. Wang, A. Gu, N. Lu, J. Bo, L. Song, N. Jin, X. Wang, The relation between urinary metabolite of pyrethroid insecticides and semen quality in humans, Fertil. Steril. 89 (2008) 1743 -1750.
- [5] J. Xue, V. Zartarian, R. Tornero-Velez, N.S. Tulve, EPA ' s SHEDS-multimedia model: Children ' s cumulative pyrethroid exposure estimates and evaluation against NHANES biomarker data, Environ. Int. 73 (2014) 304 -311.
- [6] A.R. Ravula, S. Yenugu, Effect of oral administration of a mixture of pyrethroids at doses relevant to human exposure on the general and male reproductive physiology in the rat, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 208 (2021), 111714.
- [7] H. Sun, W. Chen, X. Xu, Z. Ding, X. Chen, X. Wang, Pyrethroid and their metabolite, 3-phenoxybenzoic acid showed similar (anti)estrogenic activity in human and rat estrogen receptor alpha-mediated reporter gene assays, Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 37 (2014) 371 -377.
- [8] X. Bing, S. Ru, Determination of environmental estrogenic activity of four pyrethroid pesticides, China Environ. Sci. 29 (2009) 152 -156.
- [9] V. Go, J. Garey, M.S. Wolff, B.G.T. Pogo, Estrogenic potential of certain pyrethroid compounds in the MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cell line, Environ. Health Perspect. 107 (1999) 173 -177.
- [10] J. Zhang, P. Pavek, R. Kamaraj, L. Ren, T. Zhang, Dietary phytochemicals as modulators of human pregnane X receptor, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. (2021) 1 -23.
- [11] T. Zhang, S. Zhong, T. Li, J. Zhang, Saponins as modulators of nuclear receptors, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 60 (2020) 94 -107.
- [12] L.A. Bean, L. Ianov, T.C. Foster, Estrogen receptors, the hippocampus, and memory, Neuroscientist 20 (2014) 534 -545.
 - [13] S. Menazza, E. Murphy, The expanding complexity of estrogen receptor signaling in the cardiovascular system, Circ. Res. 118 (2016) 994 -1007.
- [14] G.J. Shim, L. Wang, S. Andersson, N. Nagy, L.L. Kis, Q.H. Zhang, S. Makela, M. Warner, J.A. Gustafsson, Disruption of the estrogen receptor beta gene in mice causes myeloproliferative disease resembling chronic myeloid leukemia with lymphoid blast crisis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 (2003) 6694 -6699.
- [15] G.G.J.M. Kuiper, B. Carlsson, K. Grandien, E. Enmark, J. Ha ¨ ggblad, S. Nilsson, J.Ak Gustafsson, Comparison of the ligand binding specificity and transcript tissue distribution of estrogen receptors α and β , Endocrinology 138 (1997) 863 -870.
- [16] P.-J. Corringer, M. Baaden, N. Bocquet, M. Delarue, V. Dufresne, H. Nury, M. Prevost, C. Van Renterghem, Atomic structure and dynamics of pentameric ligand-gated ion channels: new insight from bacterial homologues, J. Physiol. 588 (2010) 565 -572.
- [17] S.-Y. Huang, X. Zou, Advances and challenges in protein-ligand docking, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 11 (2010) 3016 -3034.
- [18] M. Karplus, Molecular dynamics simulations of biomolecules, Acc. Chem. Res. 35 (2002) 321 -323.
- [19] E. Telatar, Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels, Eur. Trans. Telecommun. 10 (1999) 585 -595.
- [20] Y. Duan, C. Wu, S. Chowdhury, M.C. Lee, G.M. Xiong, W. Zhang, R. Yang, P. Cieplak, R. Luo, T. Lee, J. Caldwell, J.M. Wang, P. Kollman, A point-charge force field for molecular mechanics simulations of proteins based on condensed-phase quantum mechanical calculations, J. Comput. Chem. 24 (2003) 1999 -2012.
- [21] J.M. Wang, R.M. Wolf, J.W. Caldwell, P.A. Kollman, D.A. Case, Development and testing of a general amber force field, J. Comput. Chem. 25 (2004) 1157 -1174.
- [22] J.P. Ryckaert, G. Ciccotti, H.J.C. Berendsen, Numerical-integration of cartesian equations of motion of a system with constraints - molecular-dynamics of nalkanes, J. Comput. Phys. 23 (1977) 327 -341.
- [23] T. Darden, D. York, L. Pedersen, Particle mesh ewald - an n.log(n) method for ewald sums in large systems, J. Chem. Phys. 98 (1993) 10089 -10092.
- [24] B.R. Miller, III, T.D. McGee, Jr, J.M. Swails, N. Homeyer, H. Gohlke, A.E. Roitberg, MMPBSA.py: an efficient program for end-state free energy calculations, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8 (2012) 3314 -3321.
- [25] N. Heldring, A. Pike, S. Andersson, J. Matthews, G. Cheng, J. Hartman, M. Tujague, A. Stroem, E. Treuter, M. Warner, J.-A. Gustafsson, Estrogen receptors: how do they signal and what are their targets, Physiol. Rev. 87 (2007) 905 -931.
- [26] A. Menuet, Y. Le Page, O. Torres, L. Kern, O. Kah, F. Pakdel, Analysis of the estrogen regulation of the zebrafish estrogen receptor (ER) reveals distinct effects of ER alpha, ER beta 1 and ER beta 2, J. Mol. Endocrinol. 32 (2004) 975 -986.
- [27] L.-Z. Zhu, S.-Z. Qi, F.-J. Cao, X.-Y. Mu, Y. Yang, C. Wang, Quizalofop-P-ethyl exposure increases estrogen axis activity in male and slightly decreases estrogen axis activity in female zebrafish ( Danio rerio ), Aquat. Toxicol. 183 (2017) 76 -84.
- [28] K. Petersen, K.E. Tollefsen, Combined effects of oestrogen receptor antagonists on in vitro vitellogenesis, Aquat. Toxicol. 112 (2012) 46 -53.
- [29] Y. Liang, Z. Fang, Molecular cloning and mRNA expression of the vitellogenin and nuclear receptor gene induced by 17 beta-estradiol in the mud carp, Cirrhinus molitorella, Ecotoxicology 21 (2012) 719 -729.
- [30] J. Muncke, R.I.L. Eggen, Vitellogenin 1 mRNA as an early molecular biomarker for endocrine disruption in developing zebrafish ( Danio rerio ), Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 25 (2006) 2734 -2741.