<!-- image -->
 ## Insecticide  Cytotoxicity and  CYP  1 A l/2 Induction  in Primary  Human and  Rat Hepatocyte Cultures
 G.  de SOUSA*, F. FONTAINE, M.  PRALAVORIO, D.  BOTTA-FRIDLUNDT, Y.  LETREUTt and  R. RAHMANI*
 *Equipe INSERM, Centre  de Recherches INRA, 41  Bd  du  Cap,  06606  Antibes  and tService d'HCpatologie,  HBpital  de la Conception, 147 Bd  Baille,  13005  Marseille,  France
 Abstract-With the increasing demand for insecticide  products, the question of their  safety has become one  of the serious world  public health concerns.  The  capability of compounds belonging  to the major insecticide  families  [such as chlorinated hydrocarbons (DDT), carbamates (carbaryl:  CBR), organophosphorus compounds (malathion,  tetrachlorvinfos:  MAL, TCV), pyrethroids  (cypermethrin: CPR) and  benzoylurea  (diflubenzuron: DFU)] in  inducing CYPIAI in  rat  and  human hepatocyte  cultures has been  tested.  Cells  were  treated during  3 days  with six  non-toxic  increasing doses of insecticides and CYPIAI expression  was  assessed by  ethoxyresorufin  O-deethylase  (EROD) activity  and  by  Northern blots.  A  strong and  dose-dependent induction was  observed  with TCV and  DFU, both in  human (approx. fiveand  sevenfold over control,  respectively) and in  rat  hepatocytes (approx. sevenfold).  However. EROD induction  and  CYPlAl mRNA levels  were  correlated for DFU but not for TCV, suggesting different regulation mechanisms for CYP IA  I gene expression by the two  compounds. CBR and  CPR exerted less induction  in both  cell types  (approx.  2.5-fold induction  compared with  approximately l6-fold for 3-methylcholanthrene),  whereas  DDT and  MAL showed no action on human hepatocytes  but decreased EROD activity  in rat  cells. Finally,  cytotoxicity studies  performed using the MTT and  the neutral red tests  demonstrated significant  differences  between  insecticides. 0 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd
 Abbrevistiom: CBR = carbaryl: CPR = cypermethrin; CYP = cytochrome P-450; DFU = diflubenzuron;  DMSO = dimethyl  sulfoxide;  EROD = ethoxyresorulin  O-deethylase;  FCS =  foetal  calf serum;  MAL = malathion;  3-MC =  3-methylcholanthrene; NR =  neutral red; TCV =  tetrachlorvinfos.
 ## INTRODUCTION
 Pesticides are widely  present  in our  environment, resulting  in  constant exposure  for  humans,  occurring through many routes  (Hodgson and Levi,  1996; Thomas, 1996).  Although the risks  associated with high-level  short-term (acute)  exposure to  these compounds are well  documented in  workers, there  is great debate  concerning  their  possible role  in many chronic human health  problems. Such problems include carcinogenesis, neurotoxicity and  reproductive and  developmental toxicity,  but  less  is  known about chronic effects of low-dose  insecticide residues in food  and  drinking water on  the liver. Only  a few data  are  available  specifically  concerning about insecticide action  on hepatic  cytochrome P-450s (CYPs)  ,  an enzyme superfamily  known to  play  an  important role in xenobiotic  detoxification  and  toxification  processes (Denison  and Whitlock,  1995;  Gonzalez et  al., 1993). Among all  the CYP forms  expressed  in the liver,
 CYPIAI is  an ubiquitous poiycyclic  aromatic
 *Authors for correspondence.
 hydrocarbon (PAH)-responsive monooxygenase enzyme   that  is involved  in  the  activation of  procarcinogen and promutagens into  reactive genotoxic metabolites .  Like  some other drug-metabolizing enzymes, its induction is  governed by genetic polymorphisms .  As  CYPIAI is not constitutively expressed (or only at low  level) in most tissues, its  induction is  of clinical and toxicological  relevance and  has been  proposed  as an indicator  of  the potentially  harmful effects of environmental  samples  .  This enzyme activation  could  be considered  to be one  of the most sensitive  and  subtle biochemical  cellular responses,  since  it generally  takes  place  at  much  lower doses of a given chemical  than those known to  cause lethal, or overly toxic,  effects  by the same  chemical.
 Primary cultures  of hepatocytes have been demonstrated to provide relevant  information  in  this matter, as they represent a metabolically competent cellular  system,  in which hepatic toxicity   and  induction  of xenobiotics can be investigated  simultaneously. Furthermore, the use of human cells  offers
 <!-- image -->
 Fig.  1.  In vitro  cytotoxicity ofinsecticides determined by  the neutral red test, after 48  hr  exposure. Results are  representative of  experiments  using  human  hepatocytes (mean of  five replicates).
 <!-- image -->
 considerable  scientific advantages because examples of  failures in  the  extrapolation of  animal toxicological  data  (in uiuo  or  in  vitro)  to humans are  frequent (de  Sousa et al., 1995; Rahmani et  al.,  1993).
 examined  both in humans and  in rats  in primary cultures of  hepatocytes.
 The data  presented  demonstrate that  many structurally different insecticides, uch  as  TCV,  DFU, CBR and  CPR significantly induce ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase  (EROD) activity  and/or  CYPlAl mRNAs, at concentrations  below  their  respective toxicity. Therefore, as  consumers are  daily exposed,  even at  very low concentrations, to insecticide residues  in food, potential  acute and chronic  adverse effects  of  these compounds to human health  through the  liver should be seriously considered.
 The aim here  was primarily to  investigate whether various  compounds belonging to the  major insecticide  families, such as DDT (a chlorinated  hydrocarbon), malathion  (MAL) and tetrachlorvinfos (TCV) (two  organophosphorus compounds), carbaryl (CBR;  a carbamate),  cypermethrin (CPR;  a pyrethroid) and diflubenzuron  (DFU;  a  benzoylurea) can  induce or inhibit  CYPlAl expression  at the protein  activity and transcription levels. Effects were
 Fig.  2.  Maximal  induction effect of the  insecticides on rat  hepatocytes  by reference to  3-MC.  EROD activity was determined  as  described in  Materials and Methods. Results  are  the  mean  of  four  separate experiments  in  triplicate. Chemical concentrations: 3-MC  (0.5 FM), MAL (50  PM),  DDT (IO PM), CBR (100  PM),  CPR (100  FM),  DFU (100 p(M), TCV (75 PM). Asterisks indicate significant differences from control  (*P c 0.05; **P &lt; 0.001; one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keul's post  hoc  test.
 <!-- image -->
 Plate  1.  Induction of  CYPlA1/2 mRNA in  cultures of  human  hepatocytes. Cells were treated with  either DMSO or various  concentrations of chemicals.  10  ng total  RNA was analysed  and CYPlAl/Z was revealed  with a radiolabelled CYPl Al probe  as described  in Materials  and  Methods.  Chemical concentrations: (lane  1)  2 PM 3-MC; (lanes 2,  3,4)  10, 25,  50 pM DFU;  (lanes 5,  6)  5,  10 pM DDT;  (lanes 7,  8, 9)  10,  5,  25 PM TCV;  (lane  10)  DMSO.
 <!-- image -->
 <!-- image -->
 INSECllClOE
 CONCENTNATION
 (PM\
 <!-- image -->
 humidified 5% CO?  atmosphere. The  medium was then renewed with the  same initial medium without FCS  but  supplemented with  hydrocortisone  hemisuccinate (1  PM),  and  containing increasing  concentrations of  the  different pesticides. Cells  were seeded on lOO-mm diameter  plates for Northern blot analysis,  or 96-well microtitre  plates  for EROD. Then, insecticides or  3-MC,  dissolved in  DMSO (final concentration  0.5%) were added to  the  cultures for 72 hr,  with a change of  medium every  24 hr.
 ## Cytotoxicity test
 The cytotoxic effects of  the  insecticides on human and  rat hepatocytes  were  assessed  after  48 hr of exposure,  by the  neutral  red (NR)  assay  and  MTT test, carried  out as previously  described  .
 ## EROD acticity assay
 Fig. 3.  Dose-dependent  increase  of  EROD activity in human  (a) and rat  (b)  hepatocytes. Cells  were treated with DMSO (0.5%).  or  with  various  concentrations of  DFU or TCV.  EROD activity was monitored by kinetic appearance of  resorufin at  37'C.  Results are  the  mean  of  three  (human cells) or four  (rat cells) separate  experiments  in  triplicate. Asterisks indicate  significant differences  from  control (*P &lt; 0.05; **P &lt; 0.001; one-way ANOVA and NewmanKeul's post  hoc test.
 ## MATERIALS AND METHODS
 The determination  of  the  EROD enzyme  activities in hepatocytes cultured for 3  days  with  the test compounds was  performed  according to Reiners et  al. (1990)  and  Donato et  al. (1993), with slight modifications. Briefly, after  treatment,  the  medium was discarded and the  96-multiwell plates were  frozen at - 80°C.  After  thawing,  200 ~1  of  buffer per  well, containing  glucose-6-phosphate  (3 IIIM), NADP (0.5 mM), dicoumarol (10 P(M), ethoxyresorufm (2 pM) and glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase (0.1 U/ml), were  added. The  EROD activity  was measured at 37C by spectrofluorimetry (i,,, = 600 nm,  i,, = 535 nm)  by following  the kinetics of  appearance  of  resorufin from ethoxyresorufin.
 ## mRNA analysis
 Total RNA was isolated from the  cell culture  by the  acidic phenol extraction procedure  (Chomczynski and Sacchi,  1987). 20  pg RNA were  size-fractionated on a  0.9% agarose  gel containing  10%  formaldehyde and transferred  to  a  nitrocellulose  membrane. Hybridization was  performed  with 480 pb  cDNA insert of  human CYPlAl mRNA corresponding to nucleotides + 3  10 to  + 790 and  labelled using ':P Biolabs  kit.
 ## Statistical analysis
 All  enzymatic  results  were  evaluated using  a one-way analysis of  variance  for  control  and insecticide-treated hepatocytes. The statistical significance was calculated using  Newman-Keuls' post  /lot test  for multiple mean comparisons  against the control  set. Cytoxicity  data  were standardized  as  the percentage of control cell  viability. The  function: optical density  = [(a - d)/( 1  + (cone/c)'] + d,  was then  fitted  with  non-linear  estimation  using  a quasi-Newton  algorithm.
 ## Chemicals
 Williams'  E  medium, penicillin-streptomycin, Lglutamine,  amino  acids  and foetal calf  serum (FCS) were  from  Eurobio  (France).  Dimethyl  sulfoxide (DMSO), glucose-6-phosphate, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, j?-NADP and  3-methycholanthrene (3-MC) were  from  Sigma (France). 7-Ethoxyresorufin  and resorufin  were from Boehringer (Germany). Pesticides  were from Ets  Cluzeau (France).
 ## Cell  culture and treatment
 Human hepatocytes were  obtained  from  liver biopsies  resected  from  secondary tumours, by  the classical two-step collagenase  perfusion technique . Rat hepatocytes were  isolated, as previously  described  (Berry  and Friend,  1969), from male  Sprague-Dawley rats weighing  220-240  g. Freshly  isolated cells were resuspended in  Williams' medium  containing  10%  FCS  and supplemented with penicillin (50  U/ml),  streptomycin (50  mg/ml)  and insulin (0.1  U/ml).  Hepatocytes  were  seeded  in collagen type  I-coated dishes.  Plates containing hepatocytes  were incubated  for  4 hr  at  37°C under a
 ## RESULTSAND DISCUSSION
 Cytotoxicity studies of  the  insecticides were performed on rat  and  human hepatocytes  by using well  defined  protocols  that  were developed in the framework  of  a multicentre  study.  In this  study, in vitro data  were  well  correlated with in  cko data. Two different endpoints  were used  -  the  MTT reduction (data  not shown) and NR  tests. As shown  in  Fig.  1, which depicts the  comparative  cytotoxicity curves  for the various insecticides, significant  differences  were observed  between  the compounds tested.  Indeed, the IC,,, values  ranged from  80 pM for TCV  to  250 pM for CBR,  whereas DFU and CPR were devoid of any cytotoxic effects  in  human hepatocytes.  Similar results were obtained in hepatocytes  of rat  origin. However, it should  be pointed  out  that  owing to  the poor  solubihty  of some  of the insecticides in the culture  medium, their  IC,,  values  may be underestimated. Nevertheless, these  experiments allowed  us  to  select the  optimal  concentrations to  be tested for  the  induction  studies.
 The  ability  of the six insecticides in inducing EROD activity  was tested in  human and rat hepatocytes, at  various  non-cytotoxic concentrations. Basal  EROD values  for  human (n  = 3)  and rat  cells (n  = 4) were 0.057  k 0.01 and 0.175  + 0.071 (pmol/min/well),  respectively. Figure 2  shows  the maximal  induction effect of the  insecticides on  rat hepatocyte primary  cultures, by  reference  to the positive control  3-MC.  DFU and TCV are  the  more potent inducers (approx. five-  to sevenfold over control, P &lt; O.OOl), followed by  CBR and  CPR (approx.  2.5  to  threefold, P &lt; 0.05). DDT and MAL exerted  no significant effect, whereas 3-MC  (0.5 pM) provoked a 16-fold induction.
 Figure 3(a,b) illustrates the  dose-dependent effect of the  most active  insecticides (DFU and TCV) in human and  rat  hepatocytes  respectively. Although. for both  insecticides, the induction seems  more important  in  rat (from  approx.  0.36  pmol/min/well at 10 PM to  1.25  pmol/min/weh at 75 PM), than  in human cells (from approx. 0.193  pmol/min/well at 10 PM to 0.484  pmol/min/weh at  75 PM), the inducing factor  over control  is  in the same  range. However, some interspecies variability could  be observed:  thus, in  rat hepatocytes (Fig. 3b), TCV  and DFU dose-dependently  induced EROD activity in  a similar way  and the  effect began to  be significant at IO PM for both  compounds. In  contrast,  DFU appeared to  be a more  potent  inducer  than TCV in human cells  (Fig. 3a), with  a  significant effect beginning  at lower concentrations.  These  results could  be  explained either  by  specific metabolic pathways of  these two xenobiotics in  rat or  in  human cells, or  different regulation mechanisms  for CYPIA I gene expression  by the  two compounds.
 The increased expression  of  CYPIAI protein  was ascertained by the  Northern blotting technique, in  rat (data  not shown)  and human cells (Plate  I), which demonstrated a dose-dependent increased accumulation of mRNA encoding for  this  enzyme. CYPlA2 transcripts were also  detected, as already observed by Schuetz et al. (1995). Surprisingly, the effect at  the  mRNA level was obtained  only  for  DFU, as  cell exposure  to  TCV failed to  induce  CYPIAI/Z expression at  the  level of  transcription.  This observation may be  explained by  a  more  rapid degradation  of  these  mRNAs following  TCV treatment,  or different regulation  mechanisms for CYPIA 1 gene expression  by the  two compounds.
 In general, although insecticide concentrations  in the human diet  are very low, these  hydrophobic molecules  are  known to  be extensively accumulated in  adipose  tissues, and may  then be liberated in  the systemic  circulation. Therefore,  our results suggest that  care  should be taken because of possible  risk stemming from the  exposure  to  insecticides, given  the well-established toxicological and clinical importance of  CYPlAl induction.
 ## REFERENCES
 Berry  M. N.  and Friend  D.  S.  (1969) High-yield preparation of  isolated rat liver parenchymal cells. Journal qf Cellulur Biology 43,  506520.
 Chomczynski  P.  and Sacchi  N.  (1987) Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid  guanidinium  thiocyanate-phenolchloroform  extraction. Analytical Biochemistry 162, 156159.
 Daujat  M.. Fabre I., Diaz D.,  Pichard  L., Fabre G.,  Fabre J.  M.,  Saint Aubert B.  and Maurel P.  (1990) Inducibility and expression of  class IA and IIIA  cytochromes  P450 in primary  cultures of  adult  human  hepatocytes. Biochemicul  Pharmacology 9,  315-326.
 Denison M. S.  and Whitlock  J. P.  Jr. (1995) Xenobiotic-inducible transcription of  cytochrome P450 genes. Journal qf  Biological  Chemistry  270, 18  175-l  8 178.
 de  Sousa  G.. Nicolas F., Valles  B., Coassolo  P. and Rahmani  R.  (1995) Relationships between in  vitro and in vivo  hepatic  biotransformation of  drugs  in  humans  and animals: pharmaco-toxicological  consequences.  Cell Biology  and  Toxicology 11, 147-153.
 Donato M. T., Gomez-Lechon M. J. and Castell J. V.  (1993) A  microassay  for  measuring cytochrome P4501Al  and P450IIBl activities in  intact human  and rat  hepatocytes cultured  on 96-well  plates. Anal.vtical Biochemistry 213, 29-33.
 Fabre  G.,  Rahmani  R.,  Placidi M.,  Combalbert J., Covo J., Cano  J.  P.,  Coulange C.,  Ducros  M.  and Rampal  M. (1988) Characterisation of  midazolam  metabolism using human  hepatic  microsomal fractions and hepatocytes  in suspension  obtained by  perfusing  whole  human liver. Biochemical  Pharmacology 37,  4389-4397.
 - Fautrel A.,  Chesne C.,  Guillouzo  A.,  de Sousa G.,  Placidi M.. Rahmani R..  Braut F..  Pichon J.. Hoellinaer  H., Vintezou  P., Diarte  I., Melcion C.,  Cordier  A.,  Lirenzon G.,  Benicourt M.,  Vannier  B., Fournex R.,  Peloux  A. F., Bichet  N.,  Gouy  D. and Cano J. P.  (1991) A multicentre study of acute in  vitro cytotoxicity in rat  liver cells. Toxicology  in  Vitro  S/6, 543-547.
- Fautrel A.,  Chesne C.,  Guillouzo  A.,  de Sousa G.,  Placidi M., Rahmani  R., Braut F.,  Pichon J.,  Hoellinger  H., Vintezou P., Melcion  C., Cordier A., Lorenzon  G., Benicourt M.,  Fournex R.,  Bichet N. and Gouy  D.  (1993) A  multicentre study  of  acute in  vitro cytotoxicity in  rat hepatocytes:  tentative  correlation  between irk  oirro toxicities and in  viao  data. ATLA 21,  281-284.
 - Gonzalez F.  J., Liu  S.  Y. and Yano  M. (1993) Regulation of  cytochrome P450  genes: molecular mechanisms. Pharmacogenetics 3, 5  l-57.
- Hodgson  E.  and Levi  P.  E.  (1996) Pesticides: an important but  underused  model  for the environmental health sciences. Environmental Health Perspectives 104, 97106.
- Ikeda T., Tsuda  S. and  Shirasu Y.  (1991)  Metabolic induction  of the hepatic  cytochrome  P450  system by chlorfenvinphos in  rats. Fundamental and Applied Toxicology 11, 361-361.
- Kopponen P..  Tijrrijnen R., Maki-Paakkanen X., Von Wright  A.  and  Klrenlapi S. (1994)  Comparison of CYPIAI induction and genotoxicity in  vitro as  indicators of  potentially harmful effects of  environmental  samples. Archives of  Toxicology 68,  167-173.
- Li H.-C.,  Dehal S.  S.  and Kupfer D. (1995) Induction  of the  hepatic CYPZB and  CYP3A enzymes by  the proestrogenic pesticide methoxychlor and by DDT in  the rat.  Effects  on  methoxychlor  metabolism. Journal of Biochemistry and Toxicology 10, 51-61.
- Nebert D. W.  (1989)  The Ah  locus  genetic  differences in toxicity, cancer,  mutation, and  birth  defects. Critical Reviews in Toxicology 20, 250-257.
- Nebert  D.  W.,  McKinnon R.  A.  and Puga  A.  (1996) Human drug-metabolizing enzyme polymorphisms:  effect  on - risk  of toxicity and cancer.  DNA and Cell  Bio/ogy 15, 273-280.
- Okey  A.  B., Riddick D.  S. and  Harper  P. A.  (1994) Molecular biology  of the  aromatic  hydrocarbon (dioxin) receptor. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences  15, 226-232.
- Rahmani  R.,  de  Sousa  G.,  Marre F., Nicolas  F.  and Placidi M.  (1993)  Potential  of  freshly  isolated  and  human hepatocytes in  drug  research and development.  In  Human Cells  in  In Vitro  Pharmaco-toxicology: Present Status Within Europe. Edited by  V.  Rogiers,  W.  Sonck, E. Shephard  and  A. Vercruysse.  pp. 117-138.  VubPress, Brussels.
- Reiners  J. J., Cantu A. R.,  Pavone A.,  Smith  S.  C.,  Gardner C. R. and Laskin D. L. (1990)  Fluorescence  assay  for per-cell  estimation of  cytochrome P-450-dependent monooxygenase activities in keratinocytes suspensions and cultures. Analytical Biochemistry 188, 3  17-324.
- Schuetz  E.  Cl., Schuetz  J.  D.,  Thompson M. T.,  Fisher  R. A.,  Madariage J.  R. and Strom S.  C. (1995) Phenotypic variability in induction  of P-glycoprotein  mRNA by aromatic  hydrocarbons in  primary human  hepatocytes. Molecular Carcinogenesis 12, 61-65.
- Thomas  R. D. (1996) Age specific  arcinogenesis: environmental  exposure  and susceptibility. Environmental Health Perspectives 103,  4548.