<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Toxicology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/toxicol

## Reproductive toxicity by exposure to low concentrations of pesticides in Caenorhabditis elegans

<!-- image -->

Aldana Moya a , Daniela Tejedor b,c , Mariana Manetti c , Araceli Clavijo d , Eduardo Pagano b,c , Eliana Munarriz b,c,* , María Florencia Kronberg b,c,*

- a C ´ atedra de Protecci ´ on vegetal, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Avda. San Martín 4453, C1417DSE Ciudad Aut ´ onoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina
- b C ´ atedra de Bioquímica, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Avda. San Martín 4453, C1417DSE Ciudad Aut ´ onoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina

c Instituto de Investigaciones en Biociencias Agrícolas y Ambientales, Universidad de Buenos Aires - Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y T ´ ecnicas, Avda. San Martín 4453, C1417DSE Ciudad Aut ´ onoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina

d Instituto de Investigaciones en Energía no Convencional, Universidad Nacional de Salta - Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y T ´ ecnicas, Avda. Bolivia 5150, A4408FVY Ciudad de Salta, Argentina

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: Endocrine disruption Alternative models Bioindicators Vitellogenin Estrogen

Plant protection products

## 1. Introduction

Pesticides are substances (or mixtures of substances) conceived to control pests. They are mainly applied in agriculture to improve crop yields  or  to  protect  foods  during  storage,  but  they  are  also  used  to

## A B S T R A C T

In view of the recurrent applications of pesticides in agricultural producing countries, the increased presence of these substances in the environment raise a demand for the evaluation of adverse effects on non-target organisms.  This  study  assesses  the  impact  of  exposure  to  five  pesticides  suspected  of  being  endocrine  disruptors (atrazine,  2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic  acid,  mancozeb,  chlorpyrifos  and  cypermethrin)  on  the  reproductive development of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . To this end, nematodes in the L4 larval stage were exposed to  different  concentrations  of  pesticides  for  24  h  and  the  consequences  on  brood  size,  percentage  of  gravid nematodes,  expression  of  reproductive-related  genes  and  vitellogenin  trafficking  and  endocytosis  were measured.  Moreover,  17 β -estradiol  was  used  as  an  estrogenic  control  for  endocrine  disrupting  compounds throughout the work. The results showed that all the pesticides disturbed to some extent one or more of the evaluated  endpoints.  Remarkably,  we  found  that  atrazine,  2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic  acid  and  chlorpyrifos produced comparable responses to 17 β -estradiol suggesting that these pesticides may have estrogen-like endocrine disrupting activity. Atrazine and 17 β -estradiol, as well as 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and chlorpyrifos to a lesser extent, decreased the brood size, affected vitellogenin trafficking and endocytosis, and changed the expression of several reproductive-related genes. Conversely, mancozeb and cypermethrin had the least impact on the evaluated endpoint. Cypermethrin affected the brood size at the highest concentration tested and mancozeb  altered  the  distribution  of  vitellogenin  only  in  approximately  10%  of  the  population.  However,  both products overexpressed hus-1 and vit-2 genes, indicating that an induction of stress could interfere with the normal development of the nematode. In conclusion, our work proved that C. elegans is a useful biological model to identify the effects of estrogen-like endocrine disruptor compounds, and the sublethal endpoints proposed may serve as an important contribution on evaluating environmental pollutants.

mitigate organisms that are considered to be harmful or pernicious at home or in public spaces. The term includes, amongst others, herbicides, fungicides and insecticides. The annual global consumption of pesticides is approximately 2 million tons, demonstrating the strong position in the market and the dependence of these products by the current agricultural

Abbreviations: ATR,  atrazine;  CPF,  chlorpyrifos;  CTF,  corrected  total  fluorescence;  CYP,  cypermethrin;  DMSO,  dimethylsulfoxide;  E2,  17 β -estradiol;  EDCs, endocrine-disrupting chemicals; MCZ, mancozeb; NGM, nematode growth medium; USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; VIT, vitellogenin; 2, 4-D, 2,4dichlorophenoxyacetic acid.

* Corresponding authors at: C ´ atedra de Bioquímica, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Avda. San Martín 4453, C1417DSE Ciudad Aut ´ onoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina

E-mail addresses: emunarriz@agro.uba.ar (E. Munarriz), kronberg@agro.uba.ar (M.F. Kronberg).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

A. Moya et al.

system (Sharma et al., 2019). Pesticides occupy a unique position among xenobiotics that humans encounter daily. In fact, they have been found in human and animal tissues all over the world connected to dietary, environmental and occupational exposure (Anwar, 1997; Dietz et al., 2013; Kumar and Mukherji, 2018; Kuang et al., 2020). In this context, there is growing concern about the adverse effects that pesticides can cause, creating a demand for the rapid and predictive evaluation of their effects on human health and the environment (Alewu and Nosiri, 2011; Zheng et al., 2016).

The hazardous effects and the modes of toxic action of pesticides on non-target organisms can be diverse, including impairment in normal body  functioning,  neurotoxicity,  carcinogenicity  and  immune  system disorders  (Khan  and  Law,  2005;  Mostafalou  and  Abdollahi,  2017). Furthermore, some pesticides can act like endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) and affect the homeostasis of organisms by interfering with the normal hormone signaling (Yilmaz et al., 2020). Over recent decades, based on human epidemiological studies and laboratory experiments  with  animals,  a  significant  increase  in  reproductive  problems have been linked to EDC exposure (Le Moal et al., 2016; Segner et al., 2003). Indeed, many pesticides deemed EDCs were found to impair the animal reproductive system and its functioning, thereby causing negative effects on fertility and population sizes (Bhardwaj and Saraf, 2014; Frazier, 2007; Lushchak et al., 2018). However, even though we know pesticides can induce reproductive toxicity, in many cases their underlying mechanisms are still unclear.

Taking into consideration the ubiquity of pesticides in the environment, the endocrine disruption and the effects on reproduction caused by  the  exposure  to  pesticides  are  high  priority  issues  in  toxicology. However,  even  though  EDCs  have  been  studied  for  25  years,  the methods  to  identify  and  regulate  them  are  still  under  development (Fuhrman and Arnon, 2015; Schug et al., 2016). This is because EDCs elicit complex responses in exposed animals through a wide range of mechanisms of action that can vary by concentration and life stage of the organism.  Therefore,  in  order  to  reduce  the  risk  associated  with  the exposure of EDCs, a large number of assays are essential to prove a causal relationship between their exposure and detrimental effects on reproductive functions. Traditionally, the evaluation of human reproductive risk from chemicals includes the extrapolation of data obtained from mammalian models, such as rodents, rabbits and nonhuman primates. Nevertheless, considering the vast amount of new chemicals in the market to be tested, animal experiments would require the sacrifice of millions of individuals (Hecker and Hollert, 2011). The above goes against the global trend to replace the use of vertebrates with alternative models in laboratory tests. In actual fact, in September 2019, the U.S. Environmental  Protection  Agency  (USEPA)  announced  that  it  will reduce requests and funding for studies with laboratory mammals by 2025 and will completely eliminate them by 2035 (USEPA, 2019). In this sense, Caenorhabditis elegans is an excellent alternative biological model  whose  use  does  not  raise  the  ethical  issues  associated  with vertebrate research and that offers several advantages to develop bioassays to estimate the potential risk of reproductive toxicity of xenobiotics (Khabib et al., 2021).

C. elegans is a non-parasitic nematode that inhabits soil and leaf-litter environments with a cosmopolitan distribution (Schulenburg and F ´ elix, 2017). The success of this nematode as a powerful tool for biological research is due to its easy and inexpensive culture in the laboratory. Furthermore, the short life cycle (2.5 -3 days at 20 ◦ C) and large number of offspring allow the production of nematodes on a large scale and a short period of time (Hunt, 2017). Its life cycle is divided into the embryonic stage, four larval phases (L1 -L4) and adulthood. The small size and transparency allow the use of fluorescent markers to study biological processes in vivo . Moreover, C. elegans is a promising model that has the potential to link the in vitro cell-based toxicological assays and in vivo vertebrate studies. This organism adapts well to high-throughput technologies and it also provides physiologically relevant information as a whole  animal.  In  addition,  it is  a  globally  accepted  model  for environmental  impact  assessment  and  there  are  even  bioassays  validated by international standards (ASTM E 2172 -01, 2002; ISO, 2010).

C. elegans has a highly differentiated and simple reproductive system. Under  natural  conditions,  most  of  the  specimens  are  self-fertilizing hermaphrodites  in  which  sperm  and  oocytes  develop  sequentially from a common gonad (Corsi et al., 2015). Hermaphrodites have a female gonad with two symmetrical U-shaped arms connected to a central uterus through the spermatheca (Kimble and Crittenden, 2005). Before reaching adulthood, the functional reproductive system is developed. The gonadal arms, the spermatheca and the uterus are formed from the L3 larval stage and the first part of the last L4 larval stage (Kimble and Hirsh, 1979). Specifically, spermatogenesis initiates at the L3 stage and is completed during the L4, resulting in the production of all sperm cells that are then stored in the two spermathecae (L ' Hernault, 2006). After this process, begins the development of female germ cells exclusively. Along each gonad arm these germ cells pass a mitotic zone to continuously generate a pool of potential oocytes. Then, oocytes progress to diakinesis, where they are arrested until meiotic maturation (Laband et al., 2018). In the proximal gonad, fully developed oocytes sequentially migrate to the spermatheca to be fertilized, proceed to the uterus, and finally the eggs are laid within two to three hours after fertilization (Greenstein, 2005; Huelgas-Morales and Greenstein, 2018). Signaling pathways and many genes involved in spermatogenesis and oogenesis have been studied in detail and identified in C. elegans (Gumienny et al., 1999; L ' Hernault, 2009). Therefore, this alternative model is a valuable tool to study how xenobiotics (including EDCs) could alter the development of the reproductive system, and from there, establish the first scientific bases to approach the consequences of these compounds on the reproduction of higher organisms.

Accordingly, we used C. elegans as the model to research the potential adverse effects on reproductive development due to the exposure to five pesticides suspected to be EDCs and widely applied in extensive crop production worldwide (Cecconi et al., 2007; Mnif et al., 2011). In this  article,  we  explore  new  approaches  to  further  characterize  the hazard of pesticide uses, that could contribute to innovative regulatory policy to protect human and environmental health. In order to do that, nematodes in L4 stage were treated with the herbicides atrazine (ATR) and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), the insecticides chlorpyrifos (CPF) and cypermethrin (CYP) and the fungicide mancozeb (MCZ). The effects on brood size, percentage of gravid nematodes, mobilization and endocytosis of vitellogenin and expression of reproductive-related genes were evaluated. Additionally, 17 β -estradiol (E2) was used as a positive estrogenic control of EDC throughout all work because it was found that C. elegans responds to this vertebrate hormone (Hoshi et al., 2003; Mimoto et al., 2007; Tominaga et al., 2003). Our work demonstrated that the use of C. elegans as a biological model allows to identify and  characterize  the  pesticides  with  estrogenic-like  EDCs  properties. The data suggest that these  bioassays  using  the  nematode C.  elegans could be included as part of pesticides regulatory policies for environmental and human health protection.

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Chemicals

Commercial formulations of pesticides were purchased as follows: ATR  (TRAC  50  FL ® ,  containing  1-chloro-3-ethylamino-6-isopropylamino-s-triazine at 500 g/l as the active ingredient) was from Atanor (Argentina); 2,4-D (DMA ® , containing 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid at 485 g/l) and CPF (LORSBAN ® 48E, containing O,O-diethyl O-3,5,6trichloro-2-pyridyl phosphorothioate at 480 g/l) were from Dow AgroSciences S.A. (Argentina); CYP (GLEXTRIN ® , containing α cyano-3- (3phenoxyphenyl) cis- trans- 3 (2,2-dichlorovinyl) 2,2-dimethyl cyclopropane  carboxylate  at  25  g/l)  was  from  GLEBA  (Argentina);  and  MCZ (CANDIL 80 ® , containing ethylene bis dithiocarbamate combined with zinc ions at 80 g/100 g) was from Agristar (Argentina). The E2 was

A. Moya et al.

supplied by Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. (United States of America) and the Trizol Reagent by Thermo Fisher Scientific (United States of America). All other chemicals were of the highest purity available.

Stock solutions of the commercial formulation of ATR, 2,4-D, CPF, CYP and MCZ were freshly made with bidistilled water and E2 with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). Different volumes of the stock solution were mixed with M9 buffer (per liter: 3 g KH2PO4, 6 g Na2HPO4, 5 g NaCl, 1 ml of 1 M MgSO4; pH 7.2), or DMSO in the case of E2, to achieve working dilutions expressed in terms of the final active ingredient concentration presented in each assay.

## 2.2. Organism and culture conditions

The C. elegans strains used in the current study were N2 var. Bristol and  RT130  [pwls23  (VIT-2::GFP)]  obtained  from  the  Caenorhabditis Genetics Center at the University of Minnesota (Minneapolis, MN, USA). C.  elegans was  routinely  propagated  on  nematode  growth  medium (NGM, per liter: 17 g agar, 2.5 g peptone and 3 g NaCl; with the addition after autoclaving of 1 ml 1 M CaCl2, 1 ml 1 M MgSO4, 25 ml 1 M KH2PO4, and 1 ml of a solution containing 5 g/l cholesterol, prepared in ethanol) plates seeded with Escherichia coli strain OP50 at 20 ◦ C as described by Brenner  (1974).  Synchronization  of  worm  culture  was  achieved  by treating gravid hermaphrodites with an alkaline bleach solution (Stiernagle, 2006). The eggs were incubated overnight in a rotor with gentle shaking at 20 ◦ C for hatching and the L1 larvae were then transferred to NGM plates with food to continue their normal development process in a synchronized way until the L4 stage.

## 2.3. Nematode pesticide acute exposure

Age-synchronized L4 staged nematodes were treated with several concentrations  of  E2  or  commercial  formulation  of  pesticides  in  M9 buffer for 24 h at 20 ◦ C supplemented with E. coli OP50 as a food source to reach a final optical density at 600 nm of 1 unit. The exposure concentrations ( µ g/l) expressed in terms of the final active ingredient presented in each assay were 0.001, 0.01, 0.1 and 1 of E2; 1, 10, 100 and 1000 of ATR; 1, 10, 100 and 1000 of 2,4-D; 0.1, 1, 10 and 100 of CPF; 0.1, 1, 10 and 100 of CYP; and 0.1, 1, 10 and 100 of MCZ. The worms incubated  with  M9  buffer  without  any  pesticide  or  0.001  g/l  DMSO without  E2  were  considered  as  a  negative  control  group.  A  24-well multiwell plate with a completely randomized design was used for the exposure. After the exposure period each biological response was evaluated as described below.

## 2.4. Brood size measurement

L4-staged nematodes were treated with E2 or commercial formulation of pesticides as described above. To determine the offspring of the treated  nematodes,  15  hermaphrodites  were  randomly  selected  per treatment and each one placed on a plate with NGM medium seeded with E.  coli .  The  parental  individuals  were  transferred  daily  to  fresh plates with food and the eggs in the old plates were incubated at 20 º C for the hatching and growth of the offspring. The count of the offspring was performed by quantifying the number of larvae until the end of the egg-laying period of the treated nematodes. Five independent biological replicates were carried out and the data is expressed as mean ± SD.

## 2.5. Determination of the percentage of gravid nematodes

L4-staged nematodes were treated with E2 or commercial formulation of pesticides as described in 2.3. Percentage of gravid nematodes was measured by microscopic observation of 100 nematodes per treatment, considering that a hermaphrodite is pregnant when it has one or more  eggs  inside  the  uterus  (H ¨ oss  et  al.,  2009).  Three  independent biological  replicates  were  performed  per  treatment  and  the  data  is expressed as mean ± SD.

## 2.6. Reverse transcriptase real-time PCR analysis

L4  staged  N2  strain  nematodes  were  treated  as  described  in  2.3. Then,  6000  nematodes  were  harvested,  washed  five  times  with  M9 buffer, resuspended into 200 μ l of Trizol Reagent and kept at GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 80 ◦ C until further use. Total RNA was isolated with Trizol Reagent protocol and  was  quantified  with  a  qubit  RNA  HS  assay  kit  using  the  qubit fluorometer  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  United  States  of  America). Complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis was performed using the Superscript  II  Reverse  Transcriptase  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  United States of America) according to the manufacturer ' s recommendations. cDNA was diluted 1:4 and 1 μ l of the resulting cDNA preparation was used  for  quantitative  real-time  PCR  using  the  Fast-Plus  EvaGreen ® Master Mix (Biotium, United States of America) and an Applied Biosystems  7500  Fast  Real-Time  PCR  system.  The  oligonucleotide  sequences of all the primers were designed according to the sequences retrieved from www.wormbase.org and using Primer 3 Plus software and checked for  specificity  with  NCBI  BLAST  (Johnson  et  al.,  2008; Untergasser  et  al.,  2007).  Table  1  shows  the  list  of  primers.  Gene expression was assessed relative to its non-pesticide respective control and a stable transcript, cdc-42 , was used as reference gene (Hoogewijs et al., 2008). The relative quantification was calculated using the software LinRegPCR (Ramakers et al., 2003). For each replicate every gene was amplified three times. The results represent the mean ± SEM of three independent biological replicates.

## 2.7. Vitellogenin distribution and endocytosis

L4-staged nematodes of strain RT130 were exposed for 24 h at 20 ◦ C to pesticides as described in 2.3 and subsequently were washed three times with M9 buffer. The animals were anesthetized using 20 mM sodium azide,  were mounted on 20 g/l agarose pads and were photographed using a Nikon Eclipse 50i optical microscope with fluorescence (excitation  wavelength  460 -495  nm,  emission  wavelength  510 -550 nm), 40X magnification and equipped with a Nikon CoolPix S10 digital camera. The distribution of the VIT-2::GFP was observed and the percentage  of  animals  possessing  abnormal  distribution  was  counted through the number of fluorescent agglutination. At least 100 nematodes per replicate were analysed. Three independent replicates were performed per treatment and the data is expressed as mean ± SD.

The  fluorescence  of  intrauterine  embryos  of  two-cell  stage  from photographed adult nematodes was quantified to estimate vitellogenin endocytosis. For this end, the ImageJ software was used and the corrected  total  fluorescence  (CTF)  was  calculated  with  the  following equation:  CTF = Egg  fluorescence  -  (Egg  area  x  Mean  background fluorescence)  (Fitzpatrick,  2014).  The  results  were  expressed  as  the fluorescence of each treatment relative to its control and represent the mean of three independent biological replicates, for which 20 embryos were analysed in each one.

## 2.8. Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis and all the graphs generated in this work were carried out using Graphpad Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Statistical significance was assessed using ANOVA followed by Dunnett ' s multiple comparison test to compare the means of brood size, percentage of gravid nematodes, gene expression and vitellogenin trafficking  with  respect  to  the  control.  Differences  were  considered statistically significant at p &lt; 0.05.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Effect of exposure to ED-putative pesticides on brood size and on the percentage of gravid nematodes

To  analyse  the  reproductive  toxicity  of  different  pesticides  in

A. Moya et al.

Table 1 Gene name, function and primer sequences of genes used in reverse transcriptase real-time PCR analysis.

| Gene    | WormBase ID    | Gene function                                                                                                                                                                       | Primer pair (5 ' ¡ 3 ' )                     |
|---------|----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| vit-2   | WBGene00006926 | Vitellogenin structural protein, precursor of egg yolk (Perez y                                                                                                                     | AGAAGGACACCGAGCTCATCC TCTCGACTTCTTGGATTTGCTC |
| cpb-3   | WBGene00000772 | Lehner, 2019) Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein enriched in oogenic cells and required for normal oogenesis (                                                     | TGGGCATTGGATCACGGAAA CGCCGACGATGATAGGGAAA    |
| hus-1   | WBGene00002042 | 2006) Nuclear protein expressed in adult germ lines in response to DNA damage ( Hofmann et al.,                                                                                     | AATTCGTACTCCAGGCCGTC GCTGTGAGCTTCACAACTCG    |
| spe- 11 | WBGene00004965 | 2002) Perinuclear protein involved in the dynamic morphology of sperm pseudopods and required for egg activation after fertilization ( Nishimura and                                | AGGGATTCTTCAACTGCGGG CCATTGTCGGGTTACCTGCT    |
| spe-6   | WBGene00004960 | Serine/threonine protein kinase needed for sperm activation, progression through late prophase of meiosis I and assembly of the major sperm protein (Varkey et al., 1993)           | TGGCTTTGTCGAGACGTGAA CGGGATGATTTTGCCCTCCT    |
| glp-1   | WBGene00001609 | Member of LIN- 12/Notch receptor family that modulates oocyte growth when sperm are available, essential for both germline maintenance and proliferation during gonad development ( | CCAACAAGTGCAGCATCGTC GGTGGTGCCATTTCATGGTT    |
| fem- 3  | WBGene00001413 | 2009). Essential protein for hermaphroditic germline sperm/ oocyte switch, positive regulator of spermatogenesis in the germ line (                                                 | AGGGCTTCCACGTATTGAGC GCGAGAGATTTCAAACGGCG    |

| Table 1 ( continued )   | Table 1 ( continued )   | Table 1 ( continued )                                                | Table 1 ( continued )                       |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Gene                    | WormBase ID             | Gene function                                                        | Primer pair (5 ' ¡ 3 ' )                    |
| cdc- 42                 | WBGene00000390          | 2007) RHO GTPase, used as housekeeping gene (Hoogewijs et al., 2008) | CTGCTGGACAGGAAGATTACG CTCGGACATTCTCGAATGAAG |

C. elegans , age-synchronized nematodes were exposed during 24 h to a concentration range of the pesticides from L4 larval stage to adulthood and  several  reproductive  endpoints  were  quantified.  This  life  period coincides with the last stage of sexual development of C. elegans , when the germ cells reach their maximum number and the reproductive organs mature, both hormonally regulated processes (Hall et al., 2017). Pesticides were used in commercial formulation considering that active ingredients are accompanied by adjuvants, resulting in products that can be more toxic than their active compounds alone (Mesnage et al., 2014). The  tested  concentrations  of  the  pesticides  were  selected  including values lower than the levels allowed in the Guidelines for the quality of drinking  water  as  well  as  considering  concentrations  found  in  the environment (Flores-García et al., 2011; Gagneten et al., 2020; Marino and Ronco, 2005; WHO, 2017; Wijnja et al., 2014). Likewise, the analysis of the steroid hormone E2, the major female sex endocrine regulator of vertebrates, was included as a positive control for the screening of estrogenic-like effects of EDCs. It was already reported that E2 affected the number of germ cells and reproduction of C. elegans (Hoshi et al., 2003; Tominaga et al., 2003).

Fig. 1 shows the effect of pesticides treatment on the brood size of the nematode. Compared with each respective negative control, E2, as well as ATR, 2,4-D and CPF significantly affected the size of the nematode offspring at almost all the concentrations tested. ATR was the pesticide analysed that most affected the brood size, causing decreases close to 30% at the highest tested concentrations (10, 100 and 1000 µ g/l). In the case of 2,4-D, the decrease in the number of the nematode progeny was between 12% and 21% at all concentrations, while with CPF the effect was of 12 -13% at the concentrations 0.1, 10 and 100 µ g/l. Besides that, the  results  showed  that  MCZ  had  no  effect  on  the  brood  size  of  the hermaphrodites exposed at any of the concentrations, while CYP only affected at the highest concentration assessed (100 µ g/l). It is important to note that by bright field microscopic observation, neither physical abnormality in the treated hermaphrodites nor embryonic lethality have been detected as a result of the pesticides treatments performed (data not shown).

To determine if the pesticides treatments cause a delay in reaching sexual  maturation,  a  bioassay  to  establish  the  percentage  of  gravid worms after  the  exposition  of  L4  larval  nematodes  during  24 h  was performed.  As  shown  in  Fig.  2,  the  worms  treated  with  E2  or  ATR showed a decrease  in  the  percentage  of  gravid  nematodes  at  all  the concentrations evaluated, while the worms treated with 2,4-D did so only at 10 µ g/l of the herbicide. CPF, MCZ and CYP did not have any significant effect on the percentage of gravid worms within the range of concentrations studied. These results suggest that treatment with ATR and 2,4-D could be causing a delay in the maturation of the nematode reproductive system as well as E2 positive control.

## 3.2. Changes in the expression patterns of reproductive-related genes upon exposure to ED-putative pesticides

It is known that the sexual maturation of C. elegans depends upon the switch in expression of hormonally regulated genes between L4 stage and the young adult. To study if the female and/or male reproductive system could be affected upon exposure to the ED-putative pesticides, a gene expression analysis on selective genes after the pesticide treatment of the L4 stage nematodes during 24 h was performed. Once again, the

A. Moya et al.

Fig. 1. Brood size of nematodes exposed to E2 (A), ATR (B), 2,4-D (C), CPF (D), CYP (E) and MCZ (F) for 24 h at 20 ◦ C as described in Material and methods. The values represent means ± SD of 5 independent biological replicates. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01 and ***p &lt; 0.001 based on ANOVA followed by Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test.

<!-- image -->

vertebrate  hormone  E2  was  used  as  a  positive  control.  Using  the expression database WormBase (2021), genes related to the reproductive system of C. elegans whose transcription was relevant during the last stage of the sexual development (L4 - young adult), were selected to be included in the gene expression analysis. Thus, cpb-3 and glp-1 genes were chosen to analyse alteration in oogenesis of the hermaphrodites, while spe-6 , spe-11 and fem-3 were  used  to  study  the  effect  on  the spermatogenesis. Furthermore, the expression of hus-1 was assessed to identify DNA damage response and the one of vit-2 to detect disturbance in the process of supplying nutrients to the embryo.

Fig. 3 shows the gene expression analyses for the selected genes after 24 h of exposure to pesticides and the hormone E2. The treatment with ATR significantly reduced the expression levels of cpb-3 gene at 10 µ g/l and of glp-1 gene at 10 and 100 µ g/l. Regarding the genes involved in the spermatogenesis,  the  expression  of  the spe-11 and fem-3 genes  was significantly  decreased  in  nematodes  exposed  to  100 µ g/l  of  ATR. Additionally, a significant increase in the vit-2 gene transcription was revealed  at  all  ATR  concentrations  evaluated.  Remarkably,  a  similar gene expression pattern was observed in E2-treated animals, indicating that both the herbicide ATR and steroid hormone could trigger a common signaling pathway in reply to treatment.

Treatment with the herbicide 2,4-D caused a significant reduction in the gene expression of cpb-3 at 10 µ g/l, spe-6 at 10 and 100 µ g/l, and fem-3 at the three concentrations tested (Fig. 3). Regarding the transcription of the vit-2 gene, a significant increase was observed for all 2,4-

D treatments, while no significant differences were found in the glp-1 , spe-11 and hus-1 genes. When the animals were exposed to CPF, there was a significant decrease in the expression of the glp-1 at all concentrations evaluated and spe-11 gene at 10 and 100 µ g/l. In addition, all the concentrations showed an increase in the expression of the vit-2 gene and in the case of hus-1 gene, at 10 µ g/l. No changes were detected in the expression of the cpb-3 , spe-6 and fem-3 genes with respect to the control. Finally, the fungicide MCZ and the insecticide CYP induced a higher expression  of  the hus-1 and vit-2 genes  at  the  three  concentrations assessed and a decreased expression of the fem-3 at some of the treatments. The cpb-3 gene expression showed an increase when the nematodes were treated at the highest concentration of CYP (100 µ g/l).

## 3.3. Influence of ED-putative pesticide exposure in vitellogenin trafficking and endocytosis

In C. elegans , vitellogenins are synthesized in the intestine of adult hermaphrodites where they recruit lipids and other nutrients to produce yolk complexes. Then, the yolk complexes are secreted into the pseudocoelom, from where they pass into the ovary to be absorbed by the three oocytes most proximal to the uterus through receptor-mediated endocytosis (Grant and Hirsh, 1999). Based on the discovery that all pesticides tested increased vit-2 gene expression (Fig. 3), the distribution and uptake of the VIT-2 protein in C. elegans upon exposure to pesticides were  further  investigated.  For  this  purpose,  transgenic  nematodes

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;αGLYPH&lt;0&gt;λGLYPH&lt;0&gt;ιGLYPH&lt;0&gt;λGLYPH&lt;0&gt;

A. Moya et al.

Fig. 2. Percentage of gravid nematodes exposed to E2 (A), ATR (B), 2,4-D (C), CPF (D), CYP (E) and MCZ (F) for 24 h at 20 ◦ C as described in Material and methods. The values represent means ± SD of 3 independent biological replicates. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, ***p &lt; 0.001 and ****p &lt; 0.0001 based on ANOVA followed by Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test.

<!-- image -->

expressing a GFP-tagged VIT-2 protein (VIT-2::GFP) were treated with the pesticides or E2 in L4 stage during 24 h and the yolk accumulation was  visualized  by  fluorescence  microscopy.  VIT-2::GFP  was  visible mainly in oocytes and intrauterine eggs of the negative control group, but in treated nematodes it often accumulated as enlarged yolk agglutination throughout the body cavity (Fig. 4). It should be noted that these abnormal yolk agglutinations were found distributed throughout the body in both gravid and non-gravid nematodes.

In order to quantify the anomaly yolk observed, the percentage of animals presenting more than 5 agglutinations throughout the body was determined for each treatment. Compared with each negative control, the steroid hormone E2, as well as the pesticides, significantly influenced the percentage of the nematodes with yolk agglutination in more than  one  of  the  concentrations  evaluated  (Fig.  5).  However,  the magnitude of the effect observed in these percentages varied widely. While E2, ATR, 2,4-D and CPF produced an increase in the average percentage of animals with abnormal yolk agglutination between 37% and  50%,  MCZ  did  to  11%  for  the  highest  concentrations  used.  In addition, the results showed that the treatment with CYP only affected approximately 2,3% of the nematodes at 1 and 10 µ g/l.

To  study  if  the  pesticide  treatment  could  affect  the  vitellogenin endocytosis of the oocytes, the fluorescence of intrauterine embryos of one cell division from adult nematodes of the same transgenic strain was quantified. Embryos of one cell division were selected for fluorescence determination since they have been fertilized recently and their yolk consumption has not been significant (Grant and Hirsh, 1999). Therefore, the VIT-2::GFP content inside these embryos could be considered comparable with that of the oocyte closest to the spermatheca. Fig. 6 shows  that  the  intrauterine  embryos  contained  a  lower  amount  of fluorescence when the nematodes were exposed to E2, ATR, 2,4-D and CPF suggesting that these chemicals could also be affecting the yolk endocytosis of the oocytes.

## 4. Discussion

Annually, approximately two million tons of pesticides are pulverized into the environment around the world (Sharma et al., 2019). The ubiquity  of  these  substances  in  the  air,  land  and  water  raises  global concerns regarding adverse health effects on humans and non-target animals. Particularly, the interference with the normal functioning of the  endocrine  system  of  exposed  organisms  is  a  controversial  aspect among  these  impacts.  In  the  last  two  decades,  several  government agencies  from  the  European  Union  and  United  States,  as  well  as non-government organizations such as the Endocrine Society, have been developing framework strategic programs to understand the mechanism of action and deal with these substances (Ho et al., 2022). Hence, EDCs detailed further research are still required to provide considerable evidence,  particularly  associated  with  mechanisms,  non-monotonic  dose-response  and  critical  windows  of  development  to  environmentally relevant concentrations (EC, 2016). Moreover, it is necessary to develop

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;αGLYPH&lt;0&gt;λGLYPH&lt;0&gt;ιGLYPH&lt;0&gt;λGLYPH&lt;0&gt;

A. Moya et al.

Fig.  3. Quantitative  RT-PCR  analysis  of  genes  involved  in  the  reproductive response in nematodes C. elegans exposed to E2, ATR, 2,4-D, CPF, CYP and MCZ for 24 h at 20 ◦ C as described in Material and methods. The expression level of each target PCR product was normalized to that of the housekeeping gene, cdc42 , and related to the control treatment. A base-2 log scale is used for the Y axis. The values represent means ± SEM of 3 independent biological replicates. *p &lt; 0.05,  **p &lt; 0.01,  ***p &lt; 0.001  and  ****p &lt; 0.0001  based  on  ANOVA followed by Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test.

<!-- image -->

Gene expression (fold change)

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;αGLYPH&lt;0&gt;λGLYPH&lt;0&gt;ιGLYPH&lt;0&gt;λGLYPH&lt;0&gt;

A. Moya et al.

Fig.  4. Representative  images  of  transgenic  nematodes  expressing  a  GFPtagged VIT-2 protein (VIT-2::GFP) exposed to pesticides for 24 h at 20 ◦ C as described  in  Material  and  methods.  Hermaphrodite  nematodes  with  normal yolk distribution (A) or with abnormal agglutinations (B) were visualized by fluorescence microscopy 24 h after the treatments. Scale bars, 0.25 µ m.

<!-- image -->

new  alternative  models  of  endocrine  disruption  that  allow  fast  and predictive evaluation of the effects on non-target organisms. Here, we evaluated  the  reproductive  toxicity  of  five  EDC-suspected  pesticides (ATR, 2,4 D, CPF, CYP and MCZ) in the model organism C. elegans and we compared the responses with those obtained by treatment with the E2  positive  estrogenic  control.  All  the  pesticides  disturbed  to  some extent one or more of the evaluated endpoints. Singularly, ATR, 2,4-D and  CPF  induced  comparable  responses  to  E2  suggesting  that  these pesticides may have estrogen-like endocrine disrupting activity.

Herbicide ATR is the most known of the triazines and it is a very widely used herbicide that has been associated with oxidative stress, cytotoxicity, reproductive toxicity and delays in sexual maturation in animals (Nicolopoulou-Stamati et al., 2016). Our results showed that ATR and E2 caused similar disturbances in all endpoints: decreased the brood size and the percentage of gravid nematodes, and altered the VTG trafficking and endocytosis. Likewise, the expression pattern of reproductive-related  genes  was  similar  with  both  chemicals.  It  is possible that the reproductive disturbances provoked by E2 or ATR were caused by a delay in the development and sexual maturity of the nematodes. This assumption arises from the fact that 12 h after the end of the treatment, the percentage of gravid animals in the treated population equaled the control group (data not shown). Likely, the treatment of nematodes during the L4 stage would produce a hormonal imbalance that leads to a developmental delay in this last larval molt. It was already shown that this stage, which is required to reach sexual maturity, is accurately regulated by neuroendocrine signally (Russel et al., 2011). In particular, between L4 and adult, germ cell meiosis begins and sperm maturation occurs. According to this observation, C. elegans treated with the EDC tributyltin during this stage showed negative effects in reproduction (Cheng et al., 2014). Furthermore, this delay in reproductive development observed in C. elegans was also reported in male and female rodents exposed to ATR (Breckenridge et al., 2015; Stoker et al., 2002).

Regarding the expression analysis of genes involved in reproductive development, it was found that ATR, and similarly E2, produced a significant underexpression of the spermatogenesis-associated genes spe-11

and fem-3 . Spe-11 gene encodes a soluble protein localized in the perinuclear region of sperm that is involved in the dynamic morphology of sperm pseudopods and is required for egg activation after fertilization, while fem-3 gene is essential for hermaphroditic germline sperm/oocyte switch and acts as a positive regulator of spermatogenesis in the germline (Kimble and Crittenden, 2007; Nishimura and L ' Hernault, 2010). Our results suggest that both ATR and E2 could affect the development of male gametes in C. elegans , which would explain at least partially the decrease of  the  brood  size  in  treated  hermaphrodites.  Moreover,  the genes associated with oogenesis cpb-3 and glp-1 ,  showed be underexpressed with both compounds, indicating that the development of the female germline would also be contributing to the observed decrease of the  progeny.  The cpb-3 gene  encodes  a  cytoplasmic  polyadenylation element-binding protein that is enriched in oogenic cells and seems to play a key role in the early phases of germ cell sex determination and meiosis  (Hasegawa  et  al.,  2006).  Meanwhile, glp-1 gene  encodes  a member protein of the conserved LIN-12/Notch receptor family that functions in the germline to modulate oocyte growth when sperm are available for fertilization and it is essential for both germline stem cell maintenance  and  germ  cell  proliferation  during  gonad  development (Nadarajan et al., 2009).

The nematode C. elegans has been documented to respond to vertebrate steroids and alters the expression patterns of VTG genes (Custodia et al., 2001; Fischer et al., 2012; Kohra et al., 1999). Our results showed that ATR, like E2, caused overexpression of vit-2 gene and induced an abnormal distribution of VTG in exposed nematodes. In addition, both compounds  caused  a  decrease  of  VTG  content  in  treated  embryos compared to those of the control group, suggesting a lower endocytosis of VTG in female gametes. Consequently, the higher expression of vit-2 and the lower VTG endocytosis in oocytes, could be the cause of the generation of VTG agglutination in the body of the exposed nematodes. In fact, it was already shown that VIT-2::GFP nematodes that fail to be taken up by oocytes accumulate VTG as large aggregates in the pseudocoelom  (Grant  and  Hirsh,  1999;  Kim  et  al.,  2011).  Although  the physiological consequences of these abnormal VTG agglutination are uncertain.  A  higher  frequency  of  nematodes  with  sterility  has  been found in those whose embryos were depleted in VTG, obtained from mothers without VTG or from null mutants of the yolk receptor-mediated endocytosis rme-2 (Jordan et al., 2019; Perez et al., 2017). This suggests that the abnormal VTG synthesis and trafficking could be one of the reasons for the negative impact on the reproductive toxicity described in the present study. In addition, other physiological functions of VTG have been described, such as a protective role during aging, antioxidant action and pathogen defense, that could be affecting the homeostasis of the treated nematodes (Fischer et al., 2012; Lynn et al., 2015; Nakamura et al., 1999; Perez and Lehner, 2019; Sornda et al., 2019).

2,4-D is currently the main ingredient of over 1500 commercially available products and is one of the most widely distributed pollutants in the environment (Akpan and Hameed, 2011). In recent years, transgenic agricultural crops resistant to 2,4-D have been released, highlighting a possible global increase in the volume of application of this herbicide (Islam et al., 2018). Several studies in different organisms show that 2, 4-D could have a potencial effect as EDC, however, there is no evidence to date that it interferes with hormonal signaling in C. elegans (Islam et al., 2018; Stürtz et al., 2010). Our results show that the treatment of L4 stage nematodes with 2,4-D decreased the percentage of gravid animals, the brood size, the VTG endocytosis, and increased the number of animals with VTG aggregates, similarly to E2 and ATR treatments. Data suggests that 2,4-D could induce an estrogenic-like effect. Accordingly, Xie  et  al.  (2005)  found  a  putative  estrogenic  activity  for  2,4-D  in rainbow trout. As discussed above for ATR and E2 results, these negative effects on the reproduction could be explained by a delay in the maturation  of  the  gonads  due  to  an  imbalance  in  the  endocrine  systems during the L4-adult stage. In fact, 2,4-D not only reduced the percentage of gravid, but it also decreased the number of eggs inside the uterus of

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;⊘GLYPH&lt;0&gt;≥GLYPH&lt;0&gt;

A. Moya et al.

Fig. 5. Percentage of nematodes expressing a GFP-tagged VIT-2 protein with abnormal yolk agglutinations exposed to E2 (A), ATR (B), 2,4-D (C), CPF (D), CYP (E) and MCZ (F) for 24 h at 20 ◦ C as described in Material and methods. The values represent means ± SD of 3 independent biological replicates. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, ***p &lt; 0.001 and ****p &lt; 0.0001 based on ANOVA followed by Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test.

<!-- image -->

treated  hermaphrodites,  indicating  a  delay  in  the  maturation  of  the reproductive system (data not shown). One possible explanation for the decrease in the brood size could be a disturbance of male and female germ cell development. The results of the gene expression analysis show that the 2,4-D reduced the expression of cpb-3 , spe-6 and fem-3 genes (Fig. 3). The subexpression of cpb-3 would indicate an imbalance in the sperm-oocyte switching signal that would lead to a defect in oogenesis, while the lower expression of fem-3 and spe-6 would indicate a defect in spermatogenesis  (Barton  et  al.,  1987;  Hodgkin,  1986;  Varkey  et  al., 1993). In line with our results, several publications report that 2,4-D produces a genotoxic effect in mammalian cells, inhibits the development and blocks the maturation of X.  laevis oocytes and it impaired normal spermatogenesis in mice and rats (Gonz ´ alez et al., 2005; Harada et al., 2016; LaChapelle et al., 2007; Maire et al., 2007; Stebbins-Boaz et  al.,  2004;  Tayeb  et  al.  2010;  Zhang  et  al.,  2017).  Furthermore,  a decrease in sperm counts and an increase in sperm abnormalities have been observed in agricultural workers exposed to 2,4-D (Islam et al., 2018).

CPF was one of most frequently used organophosphate insecticides due to its effective and cost-competitive broad-spectrum activity (Hites, 2021). Due to its reported hazardous impacts on human and animal health, many countries are gradually restricting its use. CPF toxicity was already  associated  with  neurological  dysfunctions  and  reproductive abnormalities,  and  it  is  currently  considered  EDC,  as  it  can  imitate hormone  actions  both in  vitro and in  vivo (Lasagna  et  al.,  2021).

Interestingly, Yu et al. (2015) and Mishra and Singh (2021) found evidence of a possible estrogenic effect in fish. In the present study, CPF treatments produced a decrease in the brood size and abnormalities in the  distribution  of  VTG  and  in  the  expression  of  some  genes  ( glp-1 , spe-11 , fem-3 , vit-2 ),  similarly  to  the  effects  of  E2.  The  results  in  the brood  size  were  in  a  good  agreement  with  the  results  reported  in C. elegans by Ruan et al., 2012 and in other alternative models as well (Gupta et al., 2007; Jager et al., 2007). The decrease in the number of gravid nematodes exposed to the CPF could be due to negative effects on gametes development caused either by a hormonal imbalance and/or by the generation of DNA damage. Interestingly, we found that the genes related to gametogenesis spe-11 and glp-1 were underexpressed by the effect of this insecticide (Fig. 3). Besides that, CPF produced an overexpression  of  the hus-1 gene,  that  encodes  a  nuclear  protein  that  is expressed  in  adult  germ  lines  in  response  to  DNA  damage  and  it  is considered a genotoxicity biomarker (Hofmann et al., 2002). Supporting this discovery, Gupta et al., (2007) reported evidence about CPF induced DNA damage and apoptosis in Drosophila melanogaster larvae and these effects were attributed to the generation of ROS (reactive oxygen species). Furthermore, this insecticide has been reported to induce oxidative stress and tissue damage in rats (Goel et al., 2005; Jett and Navoa, 2000).

CYP is a broad-spectrum insecticide with an enormous global use and it is one of the most studied pyrethroids worldwide due to the concern about its detrimental effects on human and animal health. Increasing

A. Moya et al.

Fig. 6. Relative fluorescence of C. elegans intrauterine one-cell stage embryos from hermaphrodites expressing GFP-tagged VIT-2 protein (VIT-2::GFP) exposed to E2 (A), ATR (B), 2,4-D (C), CPF (D), CYP (E) and MCZ (F) for 24 h at 20 ◦ C as described in Material and methods. The values represent means ± SD of 3 independent biological replicates. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01 and ***p &lt; 0.001 based on ANOVA followed by Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test.

<!-- image -->

evidence has suggested the endocrine disrupting feature of CYP in these years (Ha et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020). Besides that, MCZ is a fungicide intensively used to protect fruit and vegetables and its  production  is  expected  to  increase  due  to  its  low  price,  its broad-spectrum efficiency and the increased global demand for fresh food (Asparch et al., 2019; Market F., 2019). However, this fungicide has been linked to thyroid hormone disruption and neurotoxic effects among others (Cecconi et al., 2007; EPA, 2005; Runkle et al., 2017). The results of our study showed that CYP and MCZ exposure had little impact on the reproductive endpoint tested in C. elegans at the evaluated concentrations. CYP affected the brood size at the highest concentration assessed and MCZ altered the distribution of VTG within the body of the nematodes  only  in  approximately  10%  of  the  population.  However,  it  is important  to  note  that  both  products  overexpressed  the hus-1 gene, suggesting a possible genotoxic activity. MCZ and CYP demonstrated to produce oxidative stress and DNA damage on diverse cellular models and non-target animals (Bano and Mohanty, 2020; Dall ' Agnol et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2011; Gonz ´ alez et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2012; Ravula and Yenugu, 2021). In C. elegans , it was shown that both pesticides induce oxidative stress in treated worms, nevertheless, the concentrations used were considerably higher than those used in the present study  (Bailey  et  al.,  2016;  Shashikumar  and  Rajini,  2010).  Hence, further investigations are needed to confirm the generation of oxidative stress and its consequent genotoxicity with the concentrations tested in our study.

VTG is the  major  precursor  of  egg-yolk  proteins  conserved  in  all oviparous and whose role is to facilitate the transport of lipids, carbohydrates and other nutrients for embryonic development (Sappington and Raikhel, 1998; Tufail and Takeda, 2008). So, it is not surprising that VTG synthesis is strongly regulated hormonally at transcriptional level (Tufail and Takeda, 2008). In this study, it was observed that all the pesticides assayed, as well as E2, increased the expression of the vit-2 gene and affected the VTG distribution to some extent, highlighting that this protein may be an excellent biomarker of EDC action. However, even if the expression of VTG may be an indicator of an estrogenic-like effect, a cautious interpretation of the results is necessary. Moreover, this kind of study should be conducted in an integrative way, performing diverse as complementary bioassays in order to guarantee the correct reading of data. In fact, in C. elegans , there have been described multiple physiological and environmental factors that modulate VTG synthesis, such as oxidative stress, nutrient availability or iron overdose (Perez and Lehner, 2019). Nevertheless, due to the high evolutionary conservation of VTGs in invertebrates and vertebrates, their study is not only of great interest to understand the impact of estrogenic EDC in the nematode C. elegans , but also in other species. Indeed, VTGs are similar to human low-density lipoproteins which allow correlating C. elegans results with cholesterol transport in mammals (Perez and Lehner, 2019).

To summarize, in the present study the reproductive toxicity of the pesticides ATR, 2,4-D, CPF, CYP and MCZ was evaluated using diverse C.  elegans endpoints  like  the  brood  size,  the  percentage  of  gravid

A. Moya et al.

nematodes, the expression of reproductive-related genes and VTG trafficking and endocytosis. The results showed that ATR induced a similar response that E2 in all responses analysed. CPF and 2,4-D decreased the brood  size,  caused  abnormal  VTG  distribution  and  disturbed  the expression of some reproductive-related genes like ATR and E2, suggesting  that  CPF  and  2,4-D  could  also  induce  an  estrogenic  action. Regarding  MCZ  and  CYP,  the  reproductive  responses  evaluated  in C.  elegans did  not  show  any  pattern  similar  to  E2.  The  influence  on reproduction of ATR, CPF and 2,4-D points them out as potential health and environmental risks. As some responses were observed at concentrations below values detected in the environment, e.g . in watercourses or rainfall, the reproductive endpoints evaluated in this study could be used as biomarkers to assess the ecological risks of pesticides suspected to be EDC in order to protect the environment and the ecosystem.

## Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Argentina ' s  Ministry  of  Science, Technology and Productive Innovation through the National Agency for the Promotion of Science and Technology (grant to E. Munarriz number PICT-PRH 2014/0002) and by the National Service of Agri-Food Health and Quality (SENASA research award 2014 -2015).

## Appendix A. Supporting information

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.tox.2022.153229.

## References

- Akpan, U.G., Hameed, B.H., 2011. Photocatalytic degradation of 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid by Ca -Ce -W -TiO2 composite photocatalyst. Chem. Eng. J. 173 (2), 369 -375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2011.07.069.
- Alewu, B., Nosiri, C., 2011. Pesticides and human health. In: Stoytcheva, M. (Ed.), Pesticides in the Modern World -effects of Pesticides Exposure. IntechOpen, London, pp. 231 -250. https://doi.org/10.5772/943.
- Anwar, W.A., 1997. Biomarkers of human exposure to pesticides. Environ. Health Perspect. 105 (4), 801 -806. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.97105s4801.
- Asparch, Y., Svartz, G., P ´ erez Coll, C., 2019. Toxicity characterization and environmental risk assessment of Mancozeb on the South American common toad Rhinella arenarum. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27 (3), 3034 -3042. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11356-019-07248-7.
- Bailey, D.C., Todt, C.E., Orfield, S.E., Denney, R.D., Snapp, I.B., Negga, R., Fitsanakis, V. A., 2016. Caenorhabditis elegans chronically exposed to a Mn/Zn ethylene-bisdithiocarbamate fungicide show mitochondrial Complex I inhibition and increased reactive oxygen species. Neurotoxicology 56, 170 -179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. neuro.2016.07.011.
- Bano, F., Mohanty, B., 2020. Thyroid disrupting pesticides mancozeb and fipronil in mixture caused oxidative damage and genotoxicity in lymphoid organs of mice. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 79, 103408 -103416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. etap.2020.103408.
- Barton, M.K., Schedl, T.B., Kimble, J., 1987. Gain-of-function mutations of fem-3 , a sexdetermination gene in Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 115 (1), 107 -119. https://doi. org/10.1093/genetics/115.1.107.
- Bhardwaj, J.K., Saraf, P., 2014. Influence of toxic chemicals on female reproduction: a review. Cell Biol: Res Ther. 3 (1), 1 -10. https://doi.org/10.4172/23249293.1000110.
- Breckenridge, C.B., Sawhney Coder, P., Tisdel, M.O., Simpkins, J.W., Yi, K.D., Foradori, C.D., Handa, R.J., 2015. Effect of age, duration of exposure, and dose of atrazine on sexual maturation and the luteinizing hormone surge in the female Sprague -Dawley rat. Birth Defects Res. Part B: Dev. Reprod. Toxicol. 104 (5), 204 -217. https://doi.org/10.1002/bdrb.21154.
- Brenner, S., 1974. The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 77 (1), 71 -94. https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/77.1.71.
- Cecconi, S., Paro, R., Rossi, G., Macchiarelli, G., 2007. The effects of the endocrine disruptors dithiocarbamates on the mammalian ovary with particular regard to mancozeb. Curr. Pharm. Des. 13 (29), 2989 -3004. https://doi.org/10.2174/ 138161207782110516.
- Cheng, Z., Tian, H., Chu, H., Wu, J., Li, Y., Wang, Y., 2014. The effect of tributyltin chloride on Caenorhabditis elegans germline is mediated by a conserved DNA damage checkpoint pathway. Toxicol. Lett. 225 (3), 413 -421. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.01.010.
- Corsi, A.K., Wightman, B., Chalfie, M., 2015. Transparent window into biology: A primer on Caenorhabditis elegans (http://doi:). Genetics 200 (2), 387 -407. https://doi.org/ 10.1534/genetics.115.176099.
- Custodia, N., Won, S.J., Novillo, A., Wieland, M., Li, C., Callard, I.P., 2001. Caenorhabditis elegans as an environmental monitor using DNA microarray analysis. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 948 (1), 32 -42. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb03984.x.
- Dall ' Agnol, J.C., Pezzini, M.F., Uribe, N.S., Joveleviths, D., 2021. Systemic effects of the pesticide mancozeb -A. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 25, 4113 -4120. https://doi. org/10.26355/eurrev\_202106\_26054.
- Dietz, R., Rig ´ et, F.F., Sonne, C., Born, E.W., Bechsh ø ft, T., McKinney, M.A., Letcher, R.J., 2013. Three decades (1983 -2010) of contaminant trends in East Greenland polar bears (Ursus maritimus). Part 1: legacy organochlorine contaminants. Environ. Int. 59, 485 -493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.09.004.
- EC, 2016, Commission Staff Working Document. Impact Assessment. Defining Criteria for Identifying Endocrine Disruptors in the Context of the Implementation of the Plant Protection Products Regulation and Biocidal Products Regulation. 〈 http://ec. europa.eu/health//sites/health/files/endocrine\_disruptors/docs/2016\_impact\_ assessment\_en.pdf 〉 (Accessed 21st Feb 2022).
- Fischer, M., Regitz, C., Kahl, M., Werthebach, M., Boll, M., Wenzel, U., 2012. Phytoestrogens genistein and daidzein affect immunity in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans via alterations of vitellogenin expression. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 56 (6), 957 -965. https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201200006.
- Fitzpatrick, M., 2014. Measuring Cell Fluorescence using ImageJ. University of Birmingham, United Kingdom (The Open Lab Book). 〈 https://theolb.readthedocs.

io/en/latest/imaging/measuring-cell-fluorescence-using-imagej.html

〉

.

- Flores-García, M.E., Molina-Morales, Y., Balza-Quintero, A., Benítez-Díaz, P.R., MirandaContreras, L., 2011. Pesticide residues in drinking water of an agricultural community in the state of M ´ erida, Venezuela. Invest. clínica 52 (4), 295 -311. PMID: 22523840.
- Frazier, L.M., 2007. Reproductive disorders associated with pesticide exposure. J. Agromed. 12 (1), 27 -37. https://doi.org/10.1300/J096v12n01\_04.
- Fuhrman, V.F., Tal, A., Arnon, S., 2015. Why endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) challenge traditional risk assessment and how to respond. J. Hazard. Mater. 286, 589 -611. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.12.012.
- Gagneten, A.M., Regaldo, L., Romero, N., Van Opstal, N., Reno, U., Gervasio, S.,. Marchese, M., 2020, Impacto de la actividad agrícola en sistemas acu ´ aticos de las provincias de Santa Fe y Entre Ríos. Contribuciones al estudio latinoamericano del Rururbano.
- Goel, A., Dani, V., Dhawan, D.K., 2005. Protective effects of zinc on lipid peroxidation, antioxidant enzymes and hepatic histoarchitecture in chlorpyrifos-induced toxicity. Chem. Biol. Interact. . 156, 131 -140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2005.08.004.
- Gonz ´ alez, E.L., Romito, M.L., Latorre, M.A., Siroski, P.A., Poletta, G.L., 2021. Biomarkers of genotoxicity, immunotoxicity and oxidative stress on Caiman latirostris (Broadsnouted caiman) hatchlings exposed to pesticide formulations and mixtures widely used in agriculture. Environ. Adv. 5, 100114 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envadv.2021.100114.
- Gonz ´ alez, M., Soloneski, S., Reigosa, M.A., Larramendy, M.L., 2005. Genotoxicity of the herbicide 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic and a commercial formulation, 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid dimethylamine salt. I. Evaluation of DNA damage and cytogenetic endpoints in Chinese Hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Toxicol. Vitr. 19 (2), 289 -297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tiv.2004.10.004.
- Grant, B., Hirsh, D., 1999. Receptor-mediated endocytosis in the Caenorhabditis elegans oocyte. Mol. Biol. Cell 10 (12), 4311 -4326. https://doi.org/10.1091/ mbc.10.12.4311.
- Greenstein, D., 2005, Control of oocyte meiotic maturation and fertilization. WormBook, ed. The C. elegans Research Community, WormBook, https://doi/10.1895/ wormbook.1.53.1.
- Gumienny, T.L., Lambie, E., Hartwieg, E., Horvitz, H.R., Hengartner, M.O., 1999. Genetic control of programmed cell death in the Caenorhabditis elegans hermaphrodite germline. In: Development, 126, pp. 1011 -1022. https://doi.org/10.1242/ dev.126.5.1011.
- Gupta, S.C., Siddique, H.R., Mathur, N., Mishra, R.K., Saxena, D.K., Chowdhuri, D.K., 2007. Adverse effect of organophosphate compounds, dichlorvos and chlorpyrifos in the reproductive tissues of transgenic Drosophila melanogaster: 70 kDa heat shock protein as a marker of cellular damage. Toxicology 238 (1), 1 -14. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.tox.2007.05.017.
- Ha, M., Huang, X., Li, L., Lu, D., Liu, C., 2021. PKC α mediated by the PI3K/Akt-FOXA1 cascade facilitates cypermethrin-induced hyperthyroidism. Sci. Total Environ. 757, 143727 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143727.
- Hall, D.H., Herndon, L.A., Altun, Z., 2017, Introduction to C. elegans embryo anatomy. WormAtlas. 〈 https://www.wormatlas.org/embryo/introduction/EIntroframeset. html 〉 (Accessed 21st Feb 2022).
- Harada, Y., Tanaka, N., Ichikawa, M., Kamijo, Y., Sugiyama, E., Gonzalez, F.J., Aoyama, T., 2016. PPAR α -dependent cholesterol/testosterone disruption in Leydig cells mediates 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid-induced testicular toxicity in mice. Arch. Toxicol. 90 (12), 3061 -3071. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-016-1669-z.
- Hasegawa, E., Karashima, T., Sumiyoshi, E., Yamamoto, M., 2006. C. elegans CPB-3 interacts with DAZ-1 and functions in multiple steps of germline development. Dev. Biol. 295 (2), 689 -699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.04.002.
- Hecker, M., Hollert, H., 2011. Endocrine disruptor screening: regulatory perspectives and needs. Environ. Sci. Eur. 23 (1), 1 -14. https://doi.org/10.1186/2190-4715-23-15.

A. Moya et al.

- Hites, R.A., 2021. The Rise and Fall of Chlorpyrifos in the United States. Environ. Sci. Technol. 55 (3), 1354 -1358. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c06579.
- Ho, V., Pelland-St-Pierre, L., Gravel, S., Bouchard, M.F., Verner, M.A., Labr ` eche, F., 2022. Endocrine disruptors: Challenges and future directions in epidemiologic research. Environ. Res. 204, 111969 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.111969.
- Hodgkin, J., 1986. Sex determination in the nematode C. elegans: analysis of tra-3 suppressors and characterization of fem genes. Genetics 114 (1), 15 -52. https://doi. org/10.1093/genetics/114.1.15.
- Hofmann, E.R., Milstein, S., Boulton, S.J., Ye, M., Hofmann, J.J., Stergiou, L., Hengartner, M.O., 2002. Caenorhabditis elegans HUS-1 is a DNA damage checkpoint protein required for genome stability and EGL-1-mediated apoptosis. Curr. Biol. 12 (22), 1908 -1918. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(02)01262-9.
- Hoogewijs, D., Houthoofd, K., Matthijssens, F., Vandesompele, J., Vanfleteren, J.R., 2008. Selection and validation of a set of reliable reference genes for quantitative sod gene expression analysis in C. elegans. BMC Mol. Biol. 9 (1), 9. https://doi.org/ 10.1186/1471-2199-9-9.
- Hoshi, H., Kamata, Y., Uemura, T., 2003. Effects of 17 β -estradiol, bisphenol A and tributyltin chloride on germ cells of Caenorhabditis elegans. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 65 (8), 881 -885. https://doi.org/10.1292/jvms.65.881.
- H ¨ oss, S., J ¨ ansch, S., Moser, T., Junker, T., R ¨ ombke, J., 2009. Assessing the toxicity of contaminated soils using the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans as test organism. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 72 (7), 1811 -1818. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ecoenv.2009.07.003.
- Huelgas-Morales, G., Greenstein, D., 2018. Control of oocyte meiotic maturation in C. elegans. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 84, 90 -99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. semcdb.2017.12.005.
- Hunt, P.R., 2017. The C. elegans model in toxicity testing. J. Appl. Toxicol. 37 (1), 50 -59. https://doi.org/10.1002/jat.3357.
- Islam, F., Wang, J., Farooq, M.A., Khan, M.S., Xu, L., Zhu, J., Zhou, W., 2018. Potential impact of the herbicide 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid on human and ecosystems. Environ. Int. 111, 332 -351. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2017.10.020.
- ISO 10872. 2010, Determination of the Toxic Effect of Sediment and Soil Samples on Growth Fertility and Reproduction of Caenorhabditis elegans (Nematoda): Water Quality.
- Jager, T., Crommentuijn, T., van Gestel, C.A., Kooijman, S.A., 2007. Chronic exposure to chlorpyrifos reveals two modes of action in the springtail Folsomia candida. Environ. Pollut. 145 (2), 452 -458. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2006.04.028.
- Jett, D.A., Navoa, R.V., 2000. In vitro and in vivo effects of chlorpyrifos on glutathione peroxidase and catalase in developing rat brain. Neurotoxicology 21, 141 -145. PMID: 10794393.
- Jin, Y., Zheng, S., Pu, Y., Shu, L., Sun, L., Liu, W., Fu, Z., 2011. Cypermethrin has the potential to induce hepatic oxidative stress, DNA damage and apoptosis in adult zebrafish (Danio rerio). Chemosphere 82 (3), 398 -404. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. chemosphere.2010.09.072.
- Johnson, M., Zaretskaya, I., Raytselis, Y., Merezhuk, Y., McGinnis, S., Madden, T.L., 2008. NCBI BLAST: a better web interface. Nucleic Acids Res. 36 (2), W5 -W9.
- Jordan, J.M., Hibshman, J.D., Webster, A.K., Kaplan, R.E., Leinroth, A., Guzman, R., Hubbard, E.J.A., 2019. Insulin/IGF signaling and vitellogenin provisioning mediate intergenerational adaptation to nutrient stress. Curr. Biol. 29 (14), 2380 -2388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.062.
- Khabib, M.N.H., Sivasanku, Y., Lee, H.B., Kumar, S., Kue, C.S., 2021. Alternative Animal Models in Predictive Toxicology. Toxicology, 153053. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. tox.2021.153053.
- Khan, M.Z., Law, F.C., 2005. Adverse effects of pesticides and related chemicals on enzyme and hormone systems of fish, amphibians and reptiles: a review. Proc. Pak. Acad. Sci. 42 (4), 315 -323.
- Kim, D.W., Sung, H., Shin, D., Shen, H., Ahnn, J., Lee, S.K., Lee, S., 2011. Differential physiological roles of ESCRT complexes in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol. Cells 31 (6), 585. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10059-011-1045-z.
- Kimble, J., Hirsh, D., 1979. The postembryonic cell lineages of the hermaphrodite and male gonads in Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 70 (2), 396 -417. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/0012-1606(79)90035-6.
- Kimble, J., Crittenden, S.L., 2005. Germline proliferation and its control. WormBook: Online Rev. C. elegans Biol. 1 -14. https://doi.org/10.1895/wormbook.1.13.1.
- Kimble, J., Crittenden, S.L., 2007. Controls of germline stem cells, entry into meiosis, and the sperm/oocyte decision in Caenorhabditis elegans. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 23, 405 -433. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.cellbio.23.090506.123326.
- Kohra, S., Tominaga, N., Mitsui, Y., Takao, Y., Ishibashi, Y., Arizono, K., 1999. Determination of a screening system of endocrine disruptors by the induction of vitellogenin mRNA in C. elegans Larvae. J. Health Sci. 45, 37. https://doi.org/ 10.1248/jhs.45.P37.
- Kuang, L., Hou, Y., Huang, F., Hong, H., Sun, H., Deng, W., Lin, H., 2020. Pesticide residues in breast milk and the associated risk assessment: A review focused on China. Sci. Total Environ. 727, 138412 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. scitotenv.2020.138412.
- Kumar, R., Mukherji, S., 2018. Threat posed by persistent organochlorine pesticides and their mobility in the environment. Curr. Org. Chem. 22 (10), 954 -972. https://doi. org/10.2174/1385272822666171227150106.
- L ' Hernault, S.W., 2009. The genetics and cell biology of spermatogenesis in the nematode C. elegans. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 306 (1 -2), 59 -65. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.mce.2009.01.008.
- Laband, K., Lacroix, B., Edwards, F., Canman, J.C., Dumont, J., 2018. Live imaging of C. elegans oocytes and early embryos. Methods Cell Biol. 145, 217 -236. https://doi. org/10.1016/bs.mcb.2018.03.025.
- LaChapelle, A.M., Ruygrok, M.L., Toomer, M., Oost, J.J., Monnie, M.L., Swenson, J.A., Stebbins-Boaz, B., 2007. The hormonal herbicide, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,
- inhibits Xenopus oocyte maturation by targeting translational and post-translational mechanisms. Reprod. Toxicol. 23, 20 -31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. reprotox.2006.08.013.
- Lasagna, M., Ventura, C., Hielpos, M.S., Mardirosian, M.N., Martín, G., Miret, N., Cocca, C., 2021. Endocrine disruptor chlorpyrifos promotes migration, invasion, and stemness phenotype in 3D cultures of breast cancer cells and induces a wide range of pathways involved in cancer progression. Environ. Res., 111989 https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envres.2021.111989.
- Le Moal, J., Sharpe, R.M., J ϕ rgensen, N., Levine, H., Jurewicz, J., Mendiola, J., in name of the HURGENT Network, 2016. Toward a multi-country monitoring system of reproductive health in the context of endocrine disrupting chemical exposure. Eur. J. Public Health 26 (1), 76 -83. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckv153.
- L ' Hernault SW. Spermatogenesis. 2006, WormBook: The Online Review of C. elegans Biology. Pasadena (CA): WormBook; 2005 -2018. 〈 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ books/NBK19752/ 〉 .
- Liu, C., Qu, J., Wu, M., Huang, X., Li, L., 2021. Cypermethrin triggers YY1-mediated testosterone biosynthesis suppression. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 225, 112792 https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2021.112792.
- Lushchak, V.I., Matviishyn, T.M., Husak, V.V., Storey, J.M., Storey, K.B., 2018. Pesticide toxicity: a mechanistic approach. EXCLI J. 17, 1101. https://doi.org/10.17179/ excli2018-1710.
- Lynn, D.A., Dalton, H.M., Sowa, J.N., Wang, M.C., Soukas, A.A., Curran, S.P., 2015. Omega-3 and-6 fatty acids allocate somatic and germline lipids to ensure fitness during nutrient and oxidative stress in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112, 15378 -15383. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1514012112.
- Maire, M.A., Rast, C., Landkocz, Y., Vasseur, P., 2007. 2, 4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid: effects on Syrian hamster embryo (SHE) cell transformation, c-Myc expression, DNA damage and apoptosis. Mutat. Res. /Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 631 (2), 124 -136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrgentox.2007.03.008.
- Marino, D., Ronco, A., 2005. Cypermethrin and chlorpyrifos concentration levels in surface water bodies of the Pampa Ondulada, Argentina. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 75, 820 -826. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-005-0824-7.
- Market, F., 2019, Product: Mancozeb, Chlorothalonil, Triazoles, Strobilurin, and Others; Crop: Fruits &amp; Vegetables, Cereals &amp; Grains, Oilseeds, and Others) - Global Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends, and Forecast 2019 - 2027. 〈 https://www. transparencymarketresearch.com/report-toc/7241 〉 (accessed 21st Feb 2022).
- Mesnage, R., Defarge, N., Spiroux de Vend ˆ omois, J., S ´ eralini, G.E., 2014. Major pesticides are more toxic to human cells than their declared active principles. BioMed. Res. Int. vol. 2014 https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/179691.
- Mimoto, A., Fujii, M., Usami, M., Shimamura, M., Hirabayashi, N., Kaneko, T., Ishiura, S., 2007. Identification of an estrogenic hormone receptor in Caenorhabditis elegans. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 364 (4), 883 -888. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. bbrc.2007.10.089.
- Mishra, A., Singh, A., 2021. Chlorpyrifos Effect on Vitellogenin, Ovarian Steroid in Adult and NR5A1 Expression in Fry of the Freshwater Catfish, Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch, 1794). Asian J. Biol. Life Sci. 10 (1), 67. https://doi.org/10.5530/ ajbls.2021.10.11.
- Mnif, W., Hassine, A.I.H., Bouaziz, A., Bartegi, A., Thomas, O., Roig, B., 2011. Effect of endocrine disruptor pesticides: a review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 8 (6), 2265 -2303. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph8062265.
- Mostafalou, S., Abdollahi, M., 2017. Pesticides: an update of human exposure and toxicity. Arch. Toxicol. 91 (2), 549 -599. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-0161849-x.
- Nadarajan, S., Govindan, J.A., McGovern, M., Hubbard, E.J.A., Greenstein, D., 2009. MSP and GLP-1/Notch signaling coordinately regulate actomyosin-dependent cytoplasmic streaming and oocyte growth in C. elegans. Development 136 (13), 2223 -2234. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.034603.
- Nakamura, A., Yasuda, K., Adachi, H., Sakurai, Y., Ishii, N., Goto, S., 1999. Vitellogenin-6 is a major carbonylated protein in aged nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 264, 580 -583. https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1999.1549.
- Nicolopoulou-Stamati, P., Maipas, S., Kotampasi, C., Stamatis, P., Hens, L., 2016. Chemical pesticides and human health: the urgent need for a new concept in agriculture. Front. Public Health 4, 148. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fpubh.2016.00148.
- Nishimura, H., L ' Hernault, S.W., 2010. Spermatogenesis-defective (spe) mutants of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans provide clues to solve the puzzle of male germline functions during reproduction. Dev. Dyn.: Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Anat. 239 (5), 1502 -1514. https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.22271.
- Perez, M.F., Lehner, B., 2019. Vitellogenins-yolk gene function and regulation in Caenorhabditis elegans. Front. Physiol. 10, 1067. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fphys.2019.01067.
- Perez, M.F., Francesconi, M., Hidalgo-Carcedo, C., Lehner, B., 2017. Maternal age generates phenotypic variation in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 552 (7683), 106 -109. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25012.
- Ramakers, C., Ruijter, J.M., Deprez, R.H.L., Moorman, A.F., 2003. Assumption-free analysis of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data. Neurosci. Lett. 339 (1), 62 -66. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3940(02)01423-4.
- Ravula, A.R., Yenugu, S., 2021. Pyrethroid based pesticides -chemical and biological aspects. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 1 -24. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10408444.2021.1879007.
- Ruan, Q.L., Ju, J.J., Li, Y.H., Li, X.B., Liu, R., Liang, G.Y., Yin, L.H., 2012. Chlorpyrifos exposure reduces reproductive capacity owing to a damaging effect on gametogenesis in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. J. Appl. Toxicol. 32 (7), 527 -535. https://doi.org/10.1002/jat.1783.

A. Moya et al.

- Runkle, J., Flocks, J., Economos, J., Dunlop, A.L., 2017. A systematic review of Mancozeb as a reproductive and developmental hazard. Environ. Int. 99, 29 -42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2016.11.006.
- Russel, S., Frand, A.R., Ruvkun, G., 2011. Regulation of the C. elegans molt by pqn-47. Dev. Biol. 360 (2), 297 -309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.025.
- Sappington, T.W., Raikhel, A.S., 1998. Molecular characteristics of insect vitellogenins and vitellogenin receptors. Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 28 (5 -6), 277 -300. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0965-1748(97)00110-0.
- Schug, T.T., Johnson, A.F., Birnbaum, L.S., Colborn, T., Guillette, L.J., Crews, D.P., Collins, T., Soto, T., Vom Saal, F.S., McLachlan, J.S., Sonnenschein, C., Heindel, J.J., 2016. Minireview: Endocrine Disruptors: Past Lessons and Future Directions. Mol. Endocrinol. 30 (8), 833 -847. https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2016-1096.
- Schulenburg, H., F ´ elix, M.A., 2017. The natural biotic environment of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 206 (1), 55 -86. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.116.195511.
- Segner, H., Caroll, K., Fenske, M., Janssen, C.R., Maack, G., Pascoe, D., Wenzel, A., 2003. Identification of endocrine-disrupting effects in aquatic vertebrates and invertebrates: report from the European IDEA project. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 54 (3), 302 -314. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0147-6513(02)00039-8.
- Sharma, A., Kumar, V., Shahzad, B., Tanveer, M., Sidhu, G.P.S., Handa, N., Thukral, A.K., 2019. Worldwide pesticide usage and its impacts on ecosystem. SN Appl. Sci. 1 (11), 1 -16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-019-1485-1.
- Shashikumar, S., Rajini, P., 2010. Cypermethrin elicited responses in heat shock protein and feeding in Caenorhabditis elegans. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 73 (5), 1057 -1062. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2010.02.003.
- Sornda, T., Ezcurra, M., Kern, C., Galimov, E.R., Au, C., de la Guardia, Y., Gems, D., 2019. Production of YP170 Vitellogenins Promotes Intestinal Senescence in Caenorhabditis elegans. J. Gerontol.: Ser. A 74 (8), 1180 -1188. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/ glz067.
- Srivastava, A.K., Ali, W., Singh, R., Bhui, K., Tyagi, S., Al-Khedhairy, A.A., Shukla, Y., 2012. Mancozeb-induced genotoxicity and apoptosis in cultured human lymphocytes. Life Sci. 90 (21 -22), 815 -824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. lfs.2011.12.013.
- Stebbins-Boaz, B., Fortner, K., Frazier, J., Piluso, S., Pullen, S., Rasar, M., Winger, E., 2004. Oocyte maturation in Xenopus laevisis blocked by the hormonal herbicide, 2,4dichlorophenoxy acetic acid. Mol. Reprod. Dev.: Inc. Gamete Res. 67 (2), 233 -242. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrd.10396.
- Stiernagle, T., 2006, Maintenance of C. elegans, WormBook, ed. The C. elegans Research Community. Pasadena (CA): WormBook; 2005 -2018. https://doi/10.1895/ wormbook. 1.101. 1.
- Stoker, T.E., Guidici, D.L., Laws, S.C., Cooper, R.L., 2002. The effects of atrazine metabolites on puberty and thyroid function in the male Wistar rat. In: Toxicological Sciences, 67, pp. 198 -206. https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/67.2.198.
- Stürtz, N., Jahn, G.A., Deis, R.P., Rettori, V., Duffard, R.O., de Duffard, A.M.E., 2010. Effect of 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid on milk transfer to the litter and prolactin release in lactating rats. Toxicology 271 (1 -2), 13 -20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. tox.2010.01.016.
- Tayeb, W., Nakbi, A., Trabelsi, M., Attia, N., Miled, A., Hammami, M., 2010. Hepatotoxicity induced by sub-acute exposure of rats to 2, 4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic
- acid-based herbicide ' D ´ esormone lourd ' . J. Hazard. Mater. 180 (1 -3), 225 -233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.04.018.
- Tominaga, N., Ura, K., Kawakami, M., Kawaguchi, T., Kohra, S., Mitsui, Y., Arizono, K., 2003. Caenorhabditis elegans responses to specific steroid hormones. J. Health Sci. 49 (1), 28 -33. https://doi.org/10.1248/jhs.49.28.
- Tufail, M., Takeda, M., 2008. Molecular characteristics of insect vitellogenins. J. Insect Physiol. 54 (12), 1447 -1458. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinsphys.2008.08.007.
- Untergasser, A., Nijveen, H., Rao, X., Bisseling, T., Geurts, R., Leunissen, J.A., 2007. Primer3Plus, an enhanced web interface to Primer3. Nucleic Acids Res. 35 (2), W71 -W74. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm306.
- USEPA. 2019, Administrator Wheeler Signs Memo to Reduce Animal Testing, Awards $4.25 Million to Advance Research on Alternative Methods to Animal Testing. 〈 https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/administrator-wheeler-signs-memo-reduceanimal-testing-awards-425-million-advance 〉 (Accessed 21st Feb 2022).
- Varkey, J.P., Jansma, P.L., Minniti, A.N., Ward, S., 1993. The Caenorhabditis elegans spe-6 gene is required for major sperm protein assembly and shows second site noncomplementation with an unlinked deficiency. Genetics 133 (1), 79 -86. https://doi. org/10.1093/genetics/133.1.79.
- Wang, Q., Shen, J.Y., Zhang, R., Hong, J.W., Li, Z., Ding, Z., Xu, L.C., 2020. Effects and mechanisms of pyrethroids on male reproductive system. Toxicology 438, 152460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2020.152460.
- WHO, 2017, Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality (fourth ed.), Geneva, p. 631 incorporating the 1st addendum.
- Wijnja, H., Doherty, J.J., Safie, S.A., 2014. Changes in pesticide occurrence in suburban surface waters in Massachusetts, USA, 1999 -2010. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 93 (2), 228 -232. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-014-1251-4.
- WormBase, 2021. Available from: 〈 https://wormbase.org/#012 -34-5 〉 .
- Xie, L., Thrippleton, K., Irwin, M.A., Siemering, G.S., Mekebri, A., Crane, D., Schlenk, D., 2005. Evaluation of estrogenic activities of aquatic herbicides and surfactants using an rainbow trout vitellogenin assay. Toxicol. Sci. 87 (2), 391 -398. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/toxsci/kfi249.
- Yilmaz, B., Terekeci, H., Sandal, S., Kelestimur, F., 2020. Endocrine disrupting chemicals: exposure, effects on human health, mechanism of action, models for testing and strategies for prevention. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord. 21 (1), 127 -147. https://doi. org/10.1007/s11154-019-09521-z.
- Yu, K., Li, G., Feng, W., Liu, L., Zhang, J., Wu, W., Yan, Y., 2015. Chlorpyrifos is estrogenic and alters embryonic hatching, cell proliferation and apoptosis in zebrafish. Chem. -Biol. Interact. 239, 26 -33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cbi.2015.06.010.
- Zhang, D., Wu, Y., Yuan, Y., Liu, W., Kuang, H., Yang, J., Xu, C., 2017. Exposure to 2, 4dichlorophenoxyacetic acid induces oxidative stress and apoptosis in mouse testis. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 141, 18 -22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. pestbp.2016.10.006.
- Zheng, S., Chen, B., Qiu, X., Chen, M., Ma, Z., Yu, X., 2016. Distribution and risk assessment of 82 pesticides in Jiulong River and estuary. Chemosphere 144, 1177 -1192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.09.050.