
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
 ## Toxicology Letters
 j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsev i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / t o x l e t
 ## Binary combinations of organophosphorus and synthetic pyrethroids are more potent acetylcholinesterase inhibitors than organophosphorus and carbamate mixtures: An in vitro assessment
 Sumitra Arora a,b , Sahil Balotra c , Gunjan Pandey c , Anu Kumar a, *
 - a CSIRO Land and Water, Waite Campus, Urrbrae, South Australia, 5064, Australia - b ICAR-National Research Centre for Integrated Pest Management, PUSA Campus, New Delhi-12, India - c CSIRO Land and Water, Cluniess Ross Street, Acton, ACT, 2601, Australia
 ## H I G H L I G H T S
 - /C15 In -vitro mixture toxicity of /uniFB01 ve organophosphates and two carbamates pesticides in binary combinations was investigated.
- /C15 Eight binary combinations exhibited synergistic effects under oxidised conditions - /C15 House /uniFB02 y head acetylcholinesterse based bioassays showed differential toxicity under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions.
- /C15 Triazophos in binary combination with carbaryl and carbofuran exhibited synergistic effects.
- /C15 Organophosphate pesticides exhibited greater acetylcholinesterase inhibition in combination with pyrethroids.
 ## A R T I C L E I N F O
 Article history: Received 14 May 2015 Received in revised form 4 November 2016 Accepted 11 December 2016
 Available online 14 December 2016
 ## Keywords:
 House /uniFB02 y acetylcholinesterase Oxon analog Toxic unit model Concentration addition model Antagonism Synergism
 * Corresponding author. E-mail address: Anupama.kumar@csiro.au (A. Kumar).
 0378-4274/© 2016 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
 ## A B S T R A C T
 Anticholinesterase insecticides such as organophosphorous (OP) and carbamates pesticides (CB); and synthetic pyrethroids (SP) pesticides commonly co-occur in the environment. This raises the possibility of antagonistic, additive, or synergistic neurotoxicity in exposed organisms. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibition has been demonstrated to be useful as a biomarker for exposure to OP and CBs in many environments. This study investigated the response of house /uniFB02 y ( Musca domestica ) head AChE (HF-AChE) exposed to /uniFB01 ve OPs; chlorpyrifos (CPF), malathion (MLT), triazophos (TRZ), monocrotophos (MCP) and profenofos (PRF) and two CBs; carbaryl (CRB) and carbofuran (CBF) as individual compounds and as binary mixtures of OPs and CBs under in vitro conditions. In addition, the selected OPs and CBs were evaluated for their toxicity in binary combinations with two SPs; deltamethrin (DLT) and cypermethrin (CYP) at /uniFB01 xed concentrations of 0.1 and 10 m g/L. The toxicological interaction of /uniFB01 ve OPs with two CBs pesticides was evaluated under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions using a toxic unit (TU) approach and a concentration addition (CA) model. Pyrethroid combinations were assessed only under oxidised conditions. Since OPs and CBs act by a similar mechanism of inhibition of AChE, a dose additive effect was expected, but not conclusively found. TRZ with either CBF or CRB exhibited synergism under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions but the degree of synergism was stronger under un-oxidised conditions. Additivity was exhibited by CBF + MCP, CRB + MCP, CRB + MLT and CBF + MCP under un-oxidised conditions and CRB + MCP and CRB + CPF under oxidised conditions. Pyrethorids in combination with OPs (TRZ, MLT and CPF) were highly synergistic. In the present study, we used pure house /uniFB02 y head AChE without any interference of monooxygenase and/or esterase enzyme activities. Therefore these other enzymes were not producing the observed deviations from concentration-addition in the binary combinations between OPs, CBs and SPs. The mechanisms of OP, CB and SP interactions in pesticide mixtures requires further investigation.
 © 2016 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
 
 
 ## 1. Introduction
 In India, the total consumption of pesticides during 2009 -10 was 52,408 metric tons (MT). This included usage of 46,139 MT of indigenous pesticides and 6269 MT of imported pesticides . Based on 2009 -10 survey, among these pesticides, usage of organophosphorus pesticides (OPs) in India varied from 1164 to 1815 MT. Cypermethrin usage was the highest (2473 MT) whereas deltamethrin usage was the lowest (94 MT). In 2011 -2012, pesticide usage in India increased to 52,979 MT. Among carbamates (CBs), carbofuran usage is higher than carbaryl, but both these insecticides are being imported.
 Recently, OP-pyrethroid combinations such as cypermethrinethion, deltamethrin-triazophos, and deltamethrin-chlorpyrifos have been introduced to overcome emerging pyrethroid resistance in agricultural pests . Fixed dose combinations such as 50% of chlorpyrifos and 5% cypermethrin manufactured in China, 50% profenofos and 4% cypermethrin, 1% delatamethrin in combination with 35% EC triazophos and several other illegall pesticide mixtures are sold in India . Pyrethroids and OPs are extensively used for vector-borne disease control and are particularly important to check the outbreak of malaria. Pesticides can adversely affect vegetables, fruits, animal resources and human health . Residues of OPs, CBs and synthetic pyrethroids were detected in measurable amounts during 1997 -1998 market sampling survey of winter vegetables in Haryana, India . According to this study, approximately 32% of the vegetable samples were contaminated with OPs and CBs above their respective maximum residue limit (MRL) values. An OP pesticide, chlorpyrifos (CPF) was detected in surface waters in Bhandara and Amravati regions of India at a concentrations up to 0.5 m g/L . Residues of CPF have been also found in /uniFB01 sh in Kolleru Lake at 88,600 m g/kg .
 Traditionally, the evaluation of the quality of the aquatic environment has been undertaken at the chemical level, identifying and quantifying chemical residues in the different compartments of the ecosystem. However, to make an accurate assessment of the environmental risk, the quanti /uniFB01 cation of chemical residues should be complemented with the investigation of biomarkers that serve as early warning signals . Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is an enzyme that has been widely used as a sensitive biomarker of exposure to OP and CB pesticides .
 The OPs and CBs inhibits AChE which, in turn, hydrolyses acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter at cholinergic nerve synapses. These include the postganglionic parasympathetic and cholinergic sympathetic nerves, and both sympathetic and parasympathetic preganglionic /uniFB01 bres. Binding of OP with AChE leads to phosphorylation of the enzyme and this reaction is not easily reversible . The rate of spontaneous reactivation of AChE is very slow with diethyl OPs while it is relatively fast with dimethyl OPs. Further, there is ageing of the phosphorylated enzyme after which the enzyme cannot be reactivated by oximes. The replacement of an oxygen atom in the organophosphorus structure by sulfur leads to the formation of organothiophosphorus compounds such as chlorpyrifos, malathion and parathion, which have a lower lethal potential. However, in vivo metabolisation to the oxon metabolite enhances their toxicity . There is a clear measurable potential for mixtures of OPs and carbamates in agricultural waters to cause AChE inhibition in /uniFB01 eld-exposed /uniFB01 sh . Cypermethrin, a synthetic (Type II) pyrethroid acts on voltage-gated sodium and chloride channels in contrast to Type I pyrethroids that predominantly delay the closure of sodium channels. Pyrethroids are 2250 times more toxic to insects than humans . The mammalian resistance to pyrethroid toxicity is due to their capacity for ester hydrolysis leading to rapid detoxi /uniFB01 cation. Carboxylesterase inhibitors such as OPs may enhance the toxicity of pyrethroid by inhibiting detoxi /uniFB01 cation .
 Although OPs share a common mechanism of action, assessing cumulative risk from exposures to OP mixtures remains a challenge . In parallel to human health, OP mixture toxicity remains an important consideration for the conservation of non-target, non-mammalian species. Assessing the effects of mixtures of contaminants is an issue of high priority by many governmental agencies around the world . As the potential for multiple chemical exposure increases, the question raised is whether the toxicity of mixtures of chemicals is simply additive or whether there is potentiation of toxicity. The general consensus has been that chemicals interact by concentration addition. However past studies have demonstrated that concentration addition of the components of a mixture does not always re /uniFB02 ect the overall interaction of a mixture. The combinations of toxicants that have enhanced toxicity are of greatest concern because the toxicity predicted from the individual components would under estimate the overall toxicity. Consequently combined effects of mixtures have to be considered in ecological and human health risk assessment. In the case of pesticides, the dif /uniFB01 culty is due in part to their large numbers that enter aquatic systems via various fate and transport pathways .
 In this study, the /C0 puri /uniFB01 ed AChE enzyme from the house /uniFB02 y head was used as an in vitro model (i) to assess the toxicity of /uniFB01 ve organophosphorous pesticides: chlorpyrifos (CPF), profenofos (PRF), malathion (MLT), monocrotophos (MCP), triazophos (TRZ) in binary combinations with carbaryl (CRB) and carbofuran (CBF) under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions (ii) to assess the toxicity of /uniFB01 ve OPs and two CBs with the synthetic pyrethroids: cypermethrin (CYP) and deltamethrin (DLT) at /uniFB01 xed concentration in binary combinations under oxidised conditions.
 ## 2. Materials and methods
 ## 2.1. Chemicals and reagents
 Acetylcholinesterase from the house /uniFB02 y ( Musca domestica ) was purchased from TARI (Taiwan Agricultural Research Institute). All solvents used for stock solutions were analytical grade. Acetylthiocholine iodide (ATCh), 5 0 ,5 0 -Dithio-bis(2-Nitrobenzoic Acid) (DTNB), p -Nitrophenyl acetate, carbaryl (99.8% purity), chlorpyrifos (99.5% purity), profenofos (98.4% purity), malathion and carbofuran (99.0% purity), monocrotophos, cypermethrin and deltamethrin (99.8% purity) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Pvt. Ltd.
 Pesticide stock solutions were prepared in acetone (4 -5 g/L) and stored at /C0 18 /C14 C. Working stock solutions were prepared freshly in 50% methanol. The measured concentrations of pesticides ranged between 95 and 110% of their nominal values, The concentration range for different OPs used in the in vitro bioassays were as follows: CPF (0.003 -3.2 m g/L); MCP (0.1 -48000 m g/L); TAZ (1 -5 m g/L); PRF (7 -8100 m g/L) and MLT (0.2 -15 m g/L).
 ## 2.2. Enzyme purity and speci /uniFB01 city
 The lyophilised protein sample was dissolved in 25 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.2) buffer. The dissolved protein was
 analysed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) under native conditions. Native PAGE (polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) was performed as described  with the following modi /uniFB01 cations. Native PAGE was performed at 23 /C14 C using 3 -12% polyacrylamide gradient gel for 100 min at 150 V (Native PAGE TM , ThermoFisher scienti /uniFB01 c, USA) as per manufacturer ' s instructions. The samples were prepared in a NativePAGE TM Sample Buffer and 18.9 m g of protein was loaded. After electrophoresis the gel was stained for the esterase activity as described . Brie /uniFB02 y, the gel was placed into a solution containing a mixture of Fast Blue B dye (Sigma Aldrich, USA) and a -naphthyl acetate solution for 10 min and photographed.
 The substrate speci /uniFB01 city of the enzyme against choline esters and carboxyl esters was determined by following methods. The speci /uniFB01 c activity of the enzyme with ATCh was measured at pH 7.5 in 50 mM phosphate buffer by monitoring the increase in absorbance within the linear range at 412 nm. The increase in absorbance results from the generation of 2-nitro-5-thiobenzoate dianion (TNB 2 /C0 ) from DTNB after its reaction with thiocholine. The concentration of TNB 2 /C0 was calculated by using its molar extinction coef /uniFB01 cient, which is reported to be 14150 M /C0 1 cm /C0 1 elsewhere . The carboxylesterase activity of this enzyme against p -nitrophenyl acetate was measured in above mentioned buffer by monitoring the increase in absorbance due to production of p -nitrophenol. As the pH of the reaction mixture was not very favourable for the full deprotonation of p -nitrophenol, the increase in absorbance was monitored within the linear range at its isosbestic point which is reported to be 348 nm .
 ## 2.3. In-vitro enzyme assay
 The in vitro inhibition of AChE was evaluated using house /uniFB02 yhead puri /uniFB01 ed AChE enzyme using a modi /uniFB01 ed version of the method described by Ellman et al.  and validated by Arora and Kumar, 2015. Brie /uniFB02 y, test solutions (15 m L) at various concentrations of each pesticide and their binary mixtures were added to each microplate well followed by the addition of AChE enzyme solution. Preliminary experiments were conducted to establish the optimal incubation time for the enzyme reaction. Reaction for 10 min was observed to be optimal incubation time where linear reaction was observed for OPs and CBs, under the present study. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for ten minutes and then the residual AChE activity was determined with the microplate reader (Titerteks Multiskan MC Photometer) at 405 nm for 10 min following addition of mixture of DTNB and ATCh solutions (250 m L). The /uniFB01 nal concentrations of AChE, ATCh and DTNB were 0.005 m L/mL, 1.5 and 0.22 mM, respectively. The /uniFB01 nal well concentration of methanol was &lt; 0.01%. The kinetics of the 10 min measuring phase was determined ( D A/T). The results were corrected for the solvents and the reaction mixture with DTNB and ATCh.
 All assays were conducted with three replicates and the data from three independent trials were pooled (nine wells were averaged for each pesticide; n = 9) to calculate the median AChE inhibitory concentration (EC50) based on nominal aqueous concentrations. A spreadsheet developed by Barnes et al.  and validated for AChE investigations  was used for estimating the concentrations that caused a 20 and 50% effect (EC20, and EC50, respectively) and their 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals. This spread sheet is based on the Logit model.
 ## 2.4. Enzyme analyses before and after oxidation
 It has been shown that OPs containing a thione group, such as malathion, chlorpyrifos, triazophos, are converted into oxon derivatives by oxidation with diluted bromine water (0.4%). These oxon derivatives are more potent ChE inhibitors. Diluted bromine water (5%) was used for oxidation of OP pesticides as described earlier by Arora and Kumar . The /uniFB01 nal well concentration for bromine water was 3.33 /C2 10 /C0 6 %. The enzyme inhibition for individual and binary mixtures of the pesticides was assessed before and after oxidation with bromine water. Negative control/ blank reactions were also run with AChE and only Br water. No effect was observed in the absence of pesticide in the reaction mixture. We did not measure any other metabolite produced after the reaction with bromine water.
 ## 2.5. Binary combinations of pesticide mixturesexperimental design
 The concentrations used in the mixture toxicity tests were based on EC50 values derived from tests conducted with individual pesticides. The pesticides were added in equitoxic concentrations (identical fractions of their individual EC50 values for each pesticide). Six concentrations below the EC50 value (1/64 EC50, 1/32 EC50, 1/16 EC50, 1/8 EC50, 1 /4 EC50 and 1 /2 EC50), one at the EC50 value and three concentrations above the EC50 value (2, 4 and 8 x EC50) were established using serial dilutions. Binary mixtures of the pesticides were used for toxicity tests. The nominal amounts of pesticides were pipetted into the 96-well plate. All mixture assays were conducted in three independent triplicate trials.
 For binary combinations, EC values were expressed on the basis of individual components in the mixture. For example, in binary combinations CBF + CPF, CBF-Mix represents toxicity of CBF to inhibit AChE as (EC10, EC20 and EC50) in the presence of CPF. Similarly, CPF-Mix represents toxicity of CPF to inhibit AChE in the presence of CBF.
 For binary combinations of SPs with OPs and CBs, the pyrethroids concentration was kept constant at 0.1 and 10 m g/L and dose response curves were evaluated for EC50 and EC20 values.
 ## 2.6. Approaches used for assessing mixture toxicity
 ## 2.6.1. Toxic unit approach
 The toxic unit (TU) model has been used extensively to determine the overall toxicity of a mixture . The TU is the sum of the toxic contributions of each component in the mixture. The TU for a binary mixture is given by the following equation:
 
 where A and B are chemicals, ECx (mix) is the effect of each component in the binary mix and ECx (alone) is the EC50 or EC20 of A and B applied as single components. By this model, if TU equals one, the toxicity of the mixture is additive. If TU is greater than one, the toxicity is less than additive (antagonistic) and if the TU is less than one, the toxicity of the mixture is more than additive (synergistic) .
 For pyrethorid combinations, the mixture toxicity was evaluated by using similar TU approach where ECx (mix) and ECx alone for OPs and CBs were compared at a given pyrethroids concentration.
 ## 2.6.2. Concentration addition model
 The two most widely used conceptual models for predicting mixture toxicity are concentration addition (CA), introduced by Loewe and Muischnek , and independent action (IA), /uniFB01 rst described by Bliss .
 For this study, we applied the CA equation (equation 1) as implemented by Altenburger et al.  to examine whether the concentration-response relationships of binary combinations
 could be predicted based on the range of effects observed in response to single compounds.
 
 EC x mix is the concentration of the mixture resulting in an effect of x % relative to control, EC xi is the concentration of component i resulting in an effect of x % when applied in isolation, and pi is the proportion of the total concentration of the mixture (in molar terms) represented by component i . Whether the toxicity of each mixture conformed to CA was determined using a two-step process. First, if the observed mixture toxicity value fell within the 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals of the expected value of a model then the mixture was considered to have conformed to the model. If, however, an observed mixture toxicity value was outside the 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals of the expected value then the mixture potentially may not conform to that model.
 To enable a quantitative estimation of the difference in predicted and measured toxicities, the model deviation ratio (MDR) method  was used. For the CA model, the MDR was derived by dividing the predicted toxicity value (EC20) by the observed toxicity value. The MDR values greater than 1.3 mean that the toxicity of the mixture conforms with synergism while values less than 0.7 are taken to conform to antagonism  The MDR approach has been successfully applied by other researchers .
 ## 3. Results
 ## 3.1. Enzyme purity and speci /uniFB01 city
 Presence of a single band with esterase activity ascertained presence of a single esterase in the enzyme preparation (Fig.1). The speci /uniFB01 c activity for this enzyme against ATCh and p -nitrophenyl acetate was measured to be 13535 /C6 322 and 1.84 /C6 0.05 nmoles min /C0 1 mg /C0 1 respectively. This several log folds difference in the
 Fig. 1. NATIVE-PAGE stained with a -naphthyl acetate and Fast Blue B dye to show presence of esterases in the enzyme preparation.
 
 speci /uniFB01 c activities for two different types of esters suggests that the enzyme is AChE.
 ## 3.2. AChE inhibition of single pesticides under oxidised and unoxidised conditions
 Among the two CBs selected in this study, CBF was 12 times more toxic than CRB (Table 2). In addition, individual CRB and CBF EC50 values did not vary signi /uniFB01 cantly under un-oxidised and oxidised conditions (Tables 1 and 2). With oxidation, the sensitivity of HFAChE to CPF, TRF and MLT increased signi /uniFB01 cantly as reported earlier  (Table 2). In contrast, the two OPs (MCP and PRF), did not exhibit any signi /uniFB01 cant differences in toxicity under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions (Tables 1 and 2).
 ## 3.3. Binary mixture combinations under un-oxidised and oxidised conditions
 Eight possible binary combinations of four selected OPs and 2 CBs (CBF + CPF, CBF + MCP, CBF + PRF, CBF + TRZ, CRB + CPF, CRB + MCP, CRB + PRF, CRB + TRZ) were assessed for their toxicity under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions using HF-AChE during in vitro exposures (Tables 1 and 2). Under un-oxidised conditions, CBF + CPF was the most toxic combination with 58.5 m g/L EC50 for CPFmix in comparison to CPF-mix EC50 value of 80 m g/L for CRB + CPF (Table 1). The CRB and CBF in combination with CPF exhibited lower EC50 values in comparison to the individual CPF EC50 value of 113 m g/L (Table 1). Under un-oxidised conditions, the EC50 value of TRZ in binary combination with CBF and CRB was reduced by 12 folds and 45 folds, respectively (Table 1). In contrast, TRZ toxicity under oxidised conditions was signi /uniFB01 cantly reduced (from 3.7 -4.5 folds) in binary combination with CBF and CRB (Table 2).
 ## 3.4. Mixture toxicity assessment
 The toxicological interactions of ten OP and CB binary combinations were evaluated using the toxic unit approach (TU, Table 3) and the concentration addition model (CA, Table 4). In the present study, we used pure AChE enzyme resulting in the absence of Phase I biotransformation enzymes in the in vitro bioassays. We used bromine water to create oxidised conditions, which mimics the action of these enzymes.
 Based on TU and CA models, TRZ with CBF and CRB exhibited synergism under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions but the degree of synergism was stronger under un-oxidised conditions (Tables 3 and 4). The CRB +PRF combination exhibited antagonism under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions (Tables 3 and 4). In contrast, the CA model demonstrated synergism for CRB + MCP and CBF + MCP under un-oxidised conditions and nearly additive under oxidised conditions (Table 4).
 Under un-oxidised conditions, the TU approach demonstrated CBF + PRF combination to be antagonistic whereas synergism was established using CA model (Table 3). In contrast, both CA and TU models exhibited synergism for CBF + PRF under oxidised conditions. The TU model con /uniFB01 rmed additive responses for CBF + CPF, CBF + MCP, CRB + MCP and CRB + MLT under un-oxidised conditions (Table 4) and CRB + MCP and CRB + CPF under oxidised conditions (Table 3).
 In the current study, we also evaluated HF-AChE inhibition for four OPs (MLT, MCP, CPF and TRZ) and one CB (CRB) in binary combination with two SPs (DLT and CYP). In the presence of DLT and CYP at /uniFB01 xed concentration of 0.1 and 10 m g/L, the MLT toxicity was increased 72 -77 fold and TRZ toxicity was increased from 6 to 12 fold while CPF and CRB was increased up to two fold only (Table 5). The TU model con /uniFB01 rmed strong synergism for CPF, TRZ and MLT in the presence of DLT or CYP (Table 6).
 Table 1
 EC10, EC20 and EC50 values based on house /uniFB02 y ( Musca domestica ) head acetylcholinesterase (HF-AChE) inhibition during in vitro exposures to individual organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides and their mixtures under un-oxidised (un-brominated) conditions. 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals are provided in parenthesis.
 | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) singles   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) singles   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) singles   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) singles   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) singles   | |---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------| |                                       | EC 10 ( m g/L)                        | EC 20 ( m g/L)                        | EC 50 ( m g/L)                        | Slope                                 | | CPF a                                 | 32.6 (25 - 42)                        | 51.7 (42.8 - 62)                      | 113 (103 - 124)                       | /C0 4.06                              | | TRZ a                                 | 19904 (7093 - 55847)                  | 43851 (21617 - 88949)                 | 1,69,199 (128289 - 223152)            | /C0 2.36                              | | PRF a                                 | 175 (152 - 201)                       | 320 (288 - 356)                       | 900 (849 - 954)                       | /C0 3.09                              | | MCP a                                 | 1898 (1668 - 2159)                    | 3816 (3463 - 4205)                    | 12591                  | /C0 2.67                              | | MLT a                                 | 2691 (2219 - 3263)                    | 5821 (5025 - 6742)                    | 21764                  | /C0 2.42                              | | CRB                                   | 31 (25.8 - 37.5)                      | 62.2 (54 - 71.5)                      | 202.7 (188 - 218)                     | /C0 2.70                              | | CBF                                   | 2.8 (2.46 - 3.4)                      | 5.4 (4.7 - 6)                         | 15.6 (14.6 - 16.7)                    | /C0 2.99                              |
 Un-oxidised (un-brominated) Mixtures
 |         |                         | EC 10 ( m g/L)                                      | EC 20 ( m g/L)                                     | EC 50 ( m g/L)                                       | |---------|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------| | CBF+CPF | CBF-Mix                 | 1.5 (1.3 - 1.8)                                     | 2.9 (2.5 - 3.3)                                    | 8.5 (7.9 - 9)                                        | | CBF+MCP | CPF-Mix CBF-Mix MCP-Mix | 10.6 (8.9 - 12.6) 1(0.67 - 1.5) 1071.9 (841 - 1365) | 20 (17.5 - 22.7) 1.9(1.4 - 2.59) 2198(1835 - 2634) | 58.5 (54.5 - 62.8) 5.5(4.7 - 6.59) 7509(6822 - 8265) | | CBF+MLT | CBF-Mix                 | 1.1(0.77 - 1.68)                                    | 2.1(1.6 - 2.9)                                     | 6.5(5.59 - 7.68)                                     | | CBF+PRF | MLT-Mix CBF-Mix         | 574(432 - 764) 0.9(0.59 - 1.36)                     | 1222(987 - 1513) 1.7(1.2 - 2.39)                   | 4440(3955 - 4984) 5.4(4.5 - 6.4)                     | | CBF+TRZ | PRF-Mix                 | 46(36 - 58) 0.15(0.036 -                            | 94.6(79 - 113)                                     | 324(292 - 359) 1.8(1 - 3.2)                          | |         | CBF-Mix TRZ-Mix         | 0.6) 733(122 - 4400)                                | 0.38(0.12 - 1.1) 2187(543 - 8803)                  | 14164(6707 - 29909)                                  | | CRB+CPF | CPF-Mix CRB-Mix         | 17.9(15 - 21) 28(24 - 32.9)                         | 31(27.7 - 35) 48.8(43.49 - 54.8)                   | 79.7(74.8 - 85) 124.9(117 - 133)                     | | CRB+MLT | CRB-Mix MLT-Mix         | 10(8.48 - 12) 1427(1217 - 1673)                     | 23.6(20.7 - 26.9) 3315(2942 - 3735)                | 101(94 - 108) 14003(13107 - 14960)                   | | CRB+PRF | PRF-Mix CRB-Mix         | 112(88.9 - 142) 19.7(15.5 - 24.9)                   | 211(177 - 251) 36.9(31 - 44)                       | 621(566 - 682) 108(98.5 - 119)                       | |         | CRB-Mix                 | 0.03(0.001 - 0.9)                                   | 0.19(0.01 -                                        | 4.2(0.6 - 26)                                        | | CRB+TRZ |                         |                                                     | 3)                                                 | 3686(1084 -                                          | |         | TRZ-Mix                 | 22(2 - 255)                                         | 148(21 - 1036)                                     | 12532)                                               | |         |                         |                                                     |                                                    | 87.7(80.8 - 95)                                      | | CRB+MCP | CRB-Mix                 | 16.8(13.7 - 20.5)                                   | 30.9(26.5 - 36)                                    | 2452)                                                | |         | MCP-Mix                 | 5975(5501 - 6489)                                   | 1145(935 - 1401)                                   | 2107(1810 -                                          |
 CBF-carbofuran; CPF-chlorpyrifos; CRB-carbaryl; MLT-malathion; MCP-monocrotophos; PRF-profenofos; TRZ-triazophos.
 - a EC values for individual OPs are based on Arora and Kumar .
 ## 4. Discussion
 The primary mode of toxicity for OPs and CBs is inhibition of cholinesterase activity. Inhibition of AChE activity results in the build up of acetylcholine (ACh) at cholinergic nerve endings causing continual nerve stimulation . CPF, MLT and TRZ represent examples of the phosphorothioate class of OP insecticides. Oxidative desulfurization by Phase I biotransformation enzymes replaces the sulfur atom with an oxygen atom, resulting in an O-analog metabolite that is a more effective AChE inhibitor than the parent OP . Generally, the oxon analogues are more potent AChE inhibitors than the parent compound . In the present study, carbamate toxicity was similar under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions which is in con /uniFB01 rmation with the fact that these pesticides do not require biotransformation to an oxon form in order to inhibit AChE enzymes.
 In the present study, HF-AChE inhibition exposed to /uniFB01 ve OPs in binary mixtures with CBs was investigated under in vitro conditions. To examine the effects of oxidation on OP potency in the HF-AChE system, bromine water was used as an oxidising agent. HF-AChE inhibition for CRB and CBF was similar under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions. Individual OPs and CBs under un-oxidised conditions exhibited sensitiviy to AChE inhibition in the following order:
 ## CBF &gt; CPF &gt; CRB &gt; PRF &gt; MCP &gt; MLT &gt; TRZ
 Under oxidised conditions, CPF was observed to be the most potent pesticide and HF-AChE inhbition was in the following order:
 CPF &gt; TRZ &gt; CBF &gt; MLT &gt; CRB &gt; PRF&gt; MCP
 The CA model has recently been suggested as a conservative default assessment tool for aquatic mixtures (not just pesticides), irrespective of modes or mechanisms of action . Based on the fact that OPs and CBs act by a similar mechanism of inhibition of AChE, one would expect that the behaviour of a mixture would be a simple dose-additive effect . In the present study, OP+ CB binary combinations were mainly synergistic under oxidised conditions. Although OPs and CBs have the same mode of action, the principal difference between OP-and carbamate-induced inhibitory action is in the stability of the AChE-OP/ carbamate complex. Carbamates are considered reversible AChE inhibitors and OPs as irreversible AChE inhibitors. OPs are able to phosphorylate serine residues of AChE in non-reversible way, whereas the carbamylated serine residue is less stable and the carbamyl moiety can be split from the enzyme by spontaneous hydrolysis .
 We have earlier reported antagonistic effects of the binary combination of OPs (CPF + PRF, CPF + MLT, MCP + MLT, PRF + MLT, MLT + TRZ and PRF + TRZ) under oxidised conditions . This was explained on the basis of dispositional and/ or receptor antagonism. We also reported synergistic responses for the majority of the OP binary combinations assayed under unoxidised conditions . Triazophos showed very strong synergism in binary combinations with CPF, MCP and PRF under un-oxidised conditions. In the present study, TRZ showed synergistic effects with CBF and CRB. Laetz et al.  observed both concentration additivity and synergism in the binary combinations of carbamates and organophosphates tested, with a greater degree of synergism at higher exposure concentrations. However, the comparison between in vivo and in vitro
 Table 2
 EC10, EC20 and EC50 values based on house /uniFB02 y ( Musca domestica ) head acetylcholinesterase (HF-AChE) inhibition during in vitro exposures to individual organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides and their binary mixtures under oxidised (brominated) conditions. 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals are provided in parenthesis.
 | Oxidised (brominated) Singles   | EC 10 ( m g/L)       | EC 20 ( m g/L)     | EC 50 ( m g/L)        | Slope    | |---------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|----------| | CPF a                           | 0.05 (0.04 - 0.06)   | 0.09 (0.08 - 0.1)  | 0.22 (0.21 - 0.24)    | /C0 3.53 | | TRZ a                           | 0.11 (0.098 - 0.139) | 0.2 (0.18 - 0.24)  | 0.59 (0.55 - 0.65)    | /C0 3.10 | | PRF a                           | 256 (225 - 293)      | 429 (389 - 472)    | 1030 (975 - 1089)     | /C0 3.64 | | MLT a                           | 18 (15 - 21.9)       | 35.8 (31 - 41)     | 115 (107 - 124)       | /C0 2.74 | | MCP a                           | 2492 (2217 - 2800)   | 4515 (4147 - 4915) | 12470 (11895 - 13071) | /C0 3.14 | | CRB                             | 49.7 (42.7 - 57.9)   | 93 (83.5 - 104.5)  | 274 (258 - 291)       | /C0 2.96 | | CBF                             | 1.4 (0.9 - 2.0)      | 3.2 (2.4 - 4.2)    | 13.2 (11.5 - 15.3)    | /C0 2.25 |
 Oxidised (brominated) Mixtures
 |         |                 | EC 10 ( m g/L)                       | EC 20 ( m g/L)                                 | EC 50 ( m g/L)                              | |---------|-----------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------| | CBF+CPF | CBF-Mix CPF-Mix | 0.7 (0.4 - 1.4) 0.008(0.004 - 0.017) | 1.6 (0.9 - 2.7) 0.019(0.01 - 0.03)             | 6.15 (4.5 - 8.4) 0.07(0.05 - 1.0)           | | CBF+MCP | CBF-Mix MCP-Mix | 0.68 (04 - 1.1) 401.7 (298 - 541)    | 1.3 (0.9 - 1.9) 827.9 (660.9 - 1037)           | 4.1(3.2 - 5.2) 2850 (2474 - 3282)           | | CBF+MLT | CBF-Mix MLT-Mix | 0.46(0.19 - 1) 1.58(0.96 - 2.6)      | 0.95(0.5 - 1.8) 3.9(2.6 - 5.8)                 | 3.3(2.3 - 4.8) 18.7(14.9 - 23.4)            | | CBF+PRF | CBF-Mix PRF-Mix | 0.3(0.14 - 0.8) 16(10 - 24.5)        | 0.8(0.4 - 1.59) 40(28.9 - 56)                  | 3.4(2.3 - 5) 194.7(159 - 237)               | | CBF+TRZ | CBF-Mix TRZ-Mix | 0.6(0.37 - 0.9) 0.02(0.01 - 0.03)    | 1.18(0.8 - 1.7) 0.04(0.03 - 0.06)              | 3.7(3 - 4.5) 0.13(0.1 - 0.16)               | | CRB+CPF | CPF-Mix CRB-Mix | 0.038(0.029 - 0.051) 25.4(18 - 35)   | 0.06(0.05 - 0.07) 41(32 - 52)                  | 0.14(0.12 - 0.16) 93.7(81.5 - 107.8)        | | CRB+MLT | CRB-Mix MLT-Mix | 17.6(13 - 23.9) 8(5.9 - 10.9)        | 30(24- - 37.5)                                 | 74.7(65.5 - 85) 34(29.9 - 38.9)             | | CRB+PRF | PRF-Mix CRB-Mix | 150.8(105 - 216) 39(27 - 56)         | 13.7(10.9 - 17) 251(191.7 - 329) 65(49.7 - 85) | 601(515 - 701) 155.8(133.6 - 181.7)         | | CRB+TRZ | CRB-Mix         | 22.5(15.9 - 31.7)                    | 40(31 - 51.8)                                  | 108(93.9 - 124.6)                           | |         | TRZ-Mix         | 0.03(0.02 - 0.04)                    | 0.06(0.04 - 0.07)                              | 0.16(0.14 - 0.18)                           | | CRB+MCP | CRB-Mix MCP-Mix | 23.95 (16.63 - 34.49) 418(241 - 724) | 46.41 (35.47 - 60.71) 992(652 - 1510)          | 143.81 (124.28 - 166.41) 4352 (3336 - 5680) |
 CBF-carbofuran; CPF-chlorpyrifos; CRB-carbaryl; MLT-malathion; MCP-monocrotophos; PRF-profenofos; TRZ-triazophos.
 a EC values for individual OPs are based on Arora and Kumar .
 results should be used with caution and care should be taken when extrapolating among taxonomic groups.
 Kok and Hasirci  carried out in vitro studies using a binary mixture of enzymes, namely AChE and choline oxidase, in a biosensor. They evaluated the effect of three CBs, namely aldicarb, carbaryl, and carbofuran and their combinations in binary mixtures on AChE activity. They found that the total inhibition was not simply additive, but was lower than the sum of individual inhibition values. The degree of difference between the predicted and actual inhibition values varied depending on the combinations used and their concentrations in the assay. It was concluded that there was competition between the resulting in a lower combined inhibition than expected. Where a pesticide with a lower af /uniFB01 nity was present in high concentrations, it prevented other pesticides from interacting with the enzyme, thus lowering the overall inhibition.
 Interactions between chemicals in a mixture can be concentration dependent, or concentration ratio dependent . In the present study, the inhibition of AChE with combined pesticide OP and CB exposure during in vitro assays was induced by the OP components of the pesticide mixtures. Pesticides also act on biochemical targets other than ChEs. The calcium-dependent A-esterases can catalytically inactivate a number of OPs without being inhibited. Butrylcholinestearse
 Table 3 Toxic units (TU) derived from EC20 and EC50 values of acetylcholinesterase inhibition by 20%, and 50%, respectively for individual and binary combinations of un-oxidised and oxidised organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides (TU &lt; 1, = 1 and &gt;1 indicates synergism, additive effect and antagonism, respectively).
 | Un-oxidised (un-brominated)   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated)   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated)   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated)   | Oxidised (brominated)   | Oxidised (brominated)   | Oxidised (brominated)                                        | |-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------| | Mixtures                      | TU-EC 20                      | TU-EC 50                      | Type of joint action          | TU-EC 20                | TU- EC 50               | Type of joint action                                         | | CBF+CPF                       | 0.92                          | 1.06                          | nearly additive               | 2.4                     | 0.7                     | antagonism at lower levels and then synergistic at higher    | | CRB+CPF                       | 1.38                          | 1.32                          | antagonism                    | 1.11                    | 0.99                    | nearly additive                                              | | CBF+MCP                       | 0.93                          | 0.95                          | nearly additive               | 0.43                    | 0.49                    | synergism                                                    | | CRB+MCP                       | 1.05                          | 0.91                          | nearly additive               | 0.72                    | 0.87                    | synergism at lower levels and then nearly additive at higher | | CBF+MLT                       | 0.60                          | 0.62                          | synergism                     | 0.29                    | 0.37                    | strong synergism                                             | | CRB+MLT                       | 0.95                          | 1.14                          | nearly additive               | 0.71                    | 0.57                    | synergism                                                    | | CBF+PRF                       | 0.61                          | 0.71                          | synergism                     | 0.24                    | 0.41                    | strong synergism                                             | | CRB+PRF                       | 1.25                          | 1.22                          | antagonism                    | 1.28                    | 1.15                    | antagonism                                                   | | CBF+TRZ                       | 0.17                          | 0.20                          | strong synergism              | 0.42                    | 0.45                    | synergism                                                    | | CRB+TRZ                       | 0.01                          | 0.04                          | strong synergism              | 0.73                    | 0.66                    | synergism                                                    |
 CBF-carbofuran; CPF-chlorpyrifos; CRB-carbaryl; MLT-malathion; MCP-monocrotophos; PRF-profenofos; TRZ-triazophos.
 Table 4 Summary of mixture toxicity assessment using the concentration addition model for ten binary organophosphorus and carbamate pesticide mixtures under un-oxidised and oxidised conditions.
 | Pesticide combination   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) binary combinations   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) binary combinations   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) binary combinations   | Un-oxidised (un-brominated) binary combinations   | Oxidised (brominated) binary combinations   | Oxidised (brominated) binary combinations   | Oxidised (brominated) binary combinations   | Oxidised (brominated) binary combinations   | |-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------| |                         | Predicted EC 20 (95%CI) m g/L                     | Observed EC 20 ( m g/L)                           | MDR                                               | type of joint action                              | Predicted EC 20 (95%CI) m g/L               | Observed EC 20 ( m g/ L)                    | MDR                                         | Type of joint action                        | | CBF+CPF                 | 24.7 (21.1 - 28.4)                                | 22.9                                              | 1.08                                              | additive                                          | 2.3 (1.8 - 2.8)                             | 1.6                                         | 1.39                                        | synergism                                   | | CRB+CPF                 | 57.6 (47 - 67)                                    | 79                                                | 0.73                                              | antagonism                                        | 36.2 (32.3 - 40.4)                          | 41.1                                        | 0.88                                        | antagonism                                  | | CBF+MCP                 | 2576 (2306 - 2846)                                | 2199                                              | 1.17                                              | synergism                                         | 1545 (1236 - 1895)                          | 829                                         | 1.86                                        | synergism                                   | | CRB+MCP                 | 2036 (1809 - 2289)                                | 1176                                              | 1.73                                              | synergism                                         | 2237                           | 1038                                        | 2.15                                        | synergism                                   | | CBF+MLT                 | 2358                                 | 1224                                              | 1.93                                              | synergism                                         | 16.1 (12.7 - 19.9)                          | 4.85                                        | 3.32                                        | synergism                                   | | CRB+MLT                 | 3475 (3007 - 4012)                                | 3339                                              | 1.04                                              | additive                                          | 61.9 (54.5 - 70.3)                          | 43.7                                        | 1.42                                        | synergism                                   | | CBF+PRF                 | 166 (147 - 184)                                   | 248                                               | 0.67                                              | antagonism                                        | 137 (109 - 170)                             | 40.8                                        | 3.37                                        | synergism                                   | | CRB+PRF                 | 198 (175 - 224)                                   | 248                                               | 0.80                                              | antagonism                                        | 246 (222 - 274)                             | 316                                         | 0.78                                        | antagonism                                  | | CBF+TRZ                 | 25078 (15181 - 37584)                             | 2187                                              | 11.5                                              | synergism                                         | 2.1 (1.6 - 2.6)                             | 1.22                                        | 1.68                                        | synergism                                   | | CRB+TRZ                 | 23785 (14620 - 35728)                             | 148                                               | 160                                               | synergism                                         | 55 (49 - 63)                                | 40.1                                        | 1.36                                        | synergism                                   |
 CBF-carbofuran; CRB-carbaryl; CPF-chlorpyrifos; MLT-malathion; MCP-monocrotophos; PRF-profenofos; TRZ-triazophos.
 The model divergence ratio (MDR) is the ratio of the observed and predicted toxicity at EC20. An MDR value of 1 indicates adherence to the speci /uniFB01 ed model. MDR values &gt;1 indicates greater than expected toxicity and hence synergism among mixture components. MDR values &lt; 1 indicates less than expected toxicity and hence antagonism among mixture components. The classi /uniFB01 cation of type of joint action is based on the observed toxicity being outside the 95% con /uniFB01 dence limits of the predicted value.
 (BChE) can also bind the oxon metabolites of OP insecticides  and the carboxylesterases (CES) participate in stoichiometric binding of OP molecules . The CES family of enzymes is a key participant in the Phase I drug metabolism process, catalysing the hydrolysis of a wide range of esterand amide-containing compounds.
 Pyrethroids do not have an inhibitory effect on AChE. In the present study, DLT and CYP in combination with OPs (TRZ, MLT and CPF) were highly synergistic. According to Khan et al. , OPs could inhibit the detoxi /uniFB01 cation of SPs and increase the toxicity in binary combinations. It was concluded that the toxicities of bifenthrin, cypermethrin and deltamethrin in the resistant population of house /uniFB02 ies could be enhanced by the combination with chlorpyrifos, profenofos, emamectin and /uniFB01 pronil. Earlier
 Table 5
 EC50 and EC20 values based on house /uniFB02 y (Musca domestica) head acetylcholinesterase (HF-AChE) inhibition during in vitro exposures to binary mixtures of organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides with pyrethroids at /uniFB01 xed concentrations under oxidised (brominated) conditions. 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals are provided in parenthesis.
 | Combination of pesticides   | EC 20 ( m g/L)         | EC 50 ( m g/L)        | |-----------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------| | CPF+CYP-0.1                 | 0.019 (0.011 - 0.029)  | 0.09 (0.07 - 0.11)    | | CPF+CYP-10                  | 0.018 (0.010 - 0.029)  | 0.08 (0.06 - 0.10)    | | CPF+DLT-0.1                 | 0.020 (0.016 - 0.024)  | 0.06 (0.06 - 0.07)    | | CPF+DLT-10                  | 0.033 (0.014 - 0.078)  | 0.16 (0.09 - 0.27)    | | TRZ+CYP-0.1                 | 0.008 (0.005 - 0.11)   | 0.05 (0.01 - 0.26)    | | TRZ+CYP-10                  | 0.007 (0.004 - 0.11)   | 0.07 (0.01 - 0.43)    | | TRZ+DLT-0.1                 | 0.025 (0.019 - 0.03)   | 0.06 (0.055 - 0.074)  | | TRZ+DLT-10                  | 0.009 (0.0001 - 0.717) | 0.104 (0.006 - 1.779) | | CRB+CYP-0.1                 | 31 (21 - 46)           | 123 (98 - 155)        | | CRB+CYP-10                  | 24 (14 - 43)           | 109 (80 - 149)        | | CRB+DLT-0.1                 | 29 (21 - 40)           | 125 (105 - 150)       | | CRB+DLT-10                  | 28 (22 - 37)           | 145 (112 - 162)       | | MCP+CYP-0.1                 | 2789 (1775 - 4383)     | 8287 (6586 - 10428)   | | MCP+CYP-10                  | 2789.7 (1775 - 4383)   | 8288 (6586 - 10428)   | | MCP+DLT-0.1                 | 2439 (1899 - 3132)     | 7196 (6252 - 8282)    | | MCP+DLT- 10                 | 2554      | 7420.1 (6538 - 8421)  | | MLT+CYP-0.1                 | 1.2 (0.9 - 1.58)       | 1.50(1.37 - 1.76)     | | MLT+CYP-10                  | 0.99 (0.34 - 2.91)     | 1.57 (1.14 - 2.17)    | | MLT+DLT-0.1                 | 1 (0.80 - 1.36)        | 1.6 (1.4 - 1.8)       | | MLT+DLT-10                  | 1.05 (0.81 - 1.36)     | 1.62 (1.42 - 1.86)    |
 CPF-chlorpyrifos; CRB-carbaryl; CYP-cypermetrhirn; DLT-deltamethrin; MLT-malathion; MCP-monocrotophos; TRZ-triazophos.
 investigations have proposed that OPs, when used in combination with SPs, inhibit the enzymes (monooxygenases and/or esterases) responsible for metabolic detoxi /uniFB01 cation in different insect pests . In the present study under in vitro conditions, we have used pure house /uniFB02 y-head AChE with no A-esterase, CES and BChE enzyme activity. Therefore these other enzymes are not producing the observed deviations from concentration-addition in the binary combinations between OPs, CBs and SPs. However, A-esterases, CES and BChE were not tested in the present study. This should be further investigated in the future studies. In the present study, the EC20 and EC50 values of AChE inhibition for CPF, TRZ, MCP and MLT in combination with DLT or CYP did not increase with the increase in PYR concentrations (0.1 and 10 m g/L). We hypothesise that the binary mixture results of OPs and SPs were in /uniFB02 uenced mainly by the OP component of the mixture.
 Although attempts to account for mixtures have been made, these have generally assumed that the toxicity of the mixture conforms to the CA mode of joint action . A number of meta-analyses of mixture toxicity data have reported that while many mixtures conform to CA, between 5% and 30% of mixtures conform to synergism and therefore assuming CA would underestimate their toxicity . Few models predicting toxic effects of mixtures have effectively dealt with the in /uniFB02 uence of magnitudes of exposure and dependence on the ratios of the component chemicals. Future work determining the effects of these pesticide combinations to non-target organisms at environmentally relevant concentration is needed.
 ## 5. Conclusions
 We have shown that the joint inhibitory effects of mixtures of OP and CB insecticides on house /uniFB02 y-head AChE activity are not always dose-additive in-vitro . The concentration addition approach could severely underestimate combined toxicity of OPs where their oxon analog (metabolite) is more toxic than their parent compound. The present study has highlighted the differential toxicity of binary combinations of OP and CB pesticides under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions. Pyrethroids in combination with OPs and CBs were highly synergistic. The results from this in vitro study demonstrate environmental concern on the
 Table 6
 Toxic units (TU) derived from EC20 and EC50 values of acetylcholinesterase inhibition by 20 and 50%, respectively for individual and binary combinations of organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides with pyrethroids at /uniFB01 xed concentrations under oxidised (brominated) conditions. 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals are provided in parenthesis. TU &lt; 1, = 1 and &gt;1 indicates synergism, additive effect and antagonism, respectively.
 | Combination of pesticides   | TU 20                  | TU 50                 | Type of joint action   | |-----------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------| | CPF+CYP-0.1                 | 0.26 (0.12 - 0.32)     | 0.40 (0.30 - 0.50)    | strong synergism       | | CPF+CYP-10                  | 0.20 (0.11 - 0.32)     | 0.36 (0.27 - 0.45)    | strong synergism       | | CPF+DLT-0.1                 | 0.22 (0.18 - 0.27)     | 0.27 (0.25 - 0.31)    | strong synergism       | | CPF+DLT-10                  | 0.37 (0.16 - 0.87)     | 0.74 (0.44 - 1.23)    | nearly synergism       | | TRZ+CYP-0.1                 | 0.04 (0.025- - 0.5)    | 0.08 (0.02 - 0.43)    | strong synergism       | | TRZ+CYP-10                  | 0.03(0.02 - 0.55)      | 0.11 (0.01 - 72)      | strong synergism       | | TRZ+DLT-0.1                 | 0.125 (0.095 - 0.15)   | 0.10 (0.09 - 0.12)    | strong synergism       | | TRZ+DLT-10                  | 0.048 (0.0005 - 3.585) | 0.17 (0.01 - 2.97)    | strong synergism       | | CRB+CYP-0.1                 | 0.33 (0.23 - 0.49)     | 0.45 (0.36 - 0.57)    | synergism              | | CRB+CYP-10                  | 0.26 (0.15 - 0.46)     | 0.40 (0.29 - 0.54)    | synergism              | | CRB+DLT-0.1                 | 0.31 (0.22 - 0.43)     | 0.46 (0.38 - 0.55)    | synergism              | | CRB+DLT-10                  | 0.3 (0.24 - 0.40)      | 0.53 (0.41 - 0.59)    | synergism              | | MCP+CYP-0.1                 | 0.70 (0.44 - 1.098)    | 0.74 (0.58 - 0.93)    | nearly synergism       | | MCP+CYP-10                  | 0.70 (0.44 - 1.098)    | 0.74 (0.58 - 0.93)    | nearly synergism       | | MCP+DLT-0.1                 | 0.61 (0.48 - 0.78)     | 0.64 (0.56 - 0.74)    | nearly synergism       | | MCP+DLT- 10                 | 0.64 (0.51 - 0.81)     | 0.66 (0.58 - 0.75)    | nearly synergism       | | MLT+CYP-0.1                 | 0.034 (0.025 - 0.044)  | 0.013 (0.012 - 0.015) | strong synergism       | | MLT+CYP-10                  | 0.028 (0.009 - 0.081)  | 0.014 (0.010 - 0.019) | strong synergism       | | MLT+DLT-0.1                 | 0.028 (0.022 - 0.038)  | 0.014 (0.012 - 0.016) | strong synergism       | | MLT+DLT-10                  | 0.028 (0.023 - 0.038)  | 0.014 (0.012 - 0.016) | strong synergism       |
 CPF-chlorpyrifos; CRB-carbaryl; CYP-cypermetrhirn; DLT-deltamethrin; MLT-malathion; MCP-monocrotophos; TRZ-triazophos.
 use of TRZ and MLT in binary combination with CBs and SPs. Increased potency of these OP, CB and SP in binary combinations could result in deleterious effects on non-target organisms. It is, however, dif /uniFB01 cult to extrapolate the in vitro effects of the single pesticides and pesticide mixtures studies to in vivo exposures. Further research examining the effect that low levels of these pesticides during in vivo exposures needs to be performed in order for environmental managers to make informed decisions.
 ## Acknowledgements
 We are grateful to Dr Graeme Batley and Dr Harpreet Bhatia for reviewing this manuscript. This work was supported by PSLP-DFAT project (R-03241-01), Endeavour Post-Doctoral Fellowship and CSIRO, Australia.
 ## References
 ANZECC and ARMCANZ, 2000. National Water Quality Management Strategy, Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for Fresh and Marine Water Quality. Australian and New Zealand Environment &amp; Conservation Council and Agriculture and Resource Management Council of Australia and New Zealand, Canberra, Australia.
 - Altenburger, R., Walter, H., Grote, M., 2004. What contributes to the combined effect of a complex mixture? Environ. Sci. Tech. 38, 6353 -6362.
 Amaraneni, S.R., Pillala, R.R., 2001. Concentrations of pesticide residues in tissues of /uniFB01 sh from Kolleru Lake in India. Environ. Toxicol. 16 (6), 550 -556.
 Arora, S., Kumar, A., 2015. Binary combinations of organophosphorus pesticides exhibit differential toxicity under oxidised and un-oxidised conditions. Ecotox. Environ. Saf. 115, 93 -100.
 Barbash, J.E., 2003. The geochemistry of pesticides. In: Lollar, B.S. (Ed.), Environ. Geochem. Elsevier-Pergamon, Oxford UK, pp. 541 -577.
 Barnes, M., Correll, R., Stevens, D.P., 2003. A simple spreadsheet for estimating loweffect concentrations and associated logistic dose response curves. Abstracts, SETAC Asia/Paci /uniFB01 c -Australasian Society for Ecotoxicology Meeting: Solutions to Pollution. Christchurch, New Zealand, pp. 156 September 28 -October 1.
 Belden, J., Gilliom, R., Lydy, M., 2007. How well can we predict the toxicity of pesticide mixtures to aquatic life? Integr. Environ. Assess. Manag. 3, 364 -372.
 Bliss,
 C.I.,
 1939.
 The toxicity
 of poisons
 applied jointly.
 Ann.
 App.
 Biol.
 26,
 585
 615.
 Bradberry, S.M., Cage, S.A., Proudfoot, A.T., Vale, J.A., 2005. Poisoning due to pyrethroids. Toxicol. Rev. 24, 93 -106.
 - Bryne, F.J., Devonshire, A.L., 1991. In vivo inhibition of esterase and acetylcholinesterase activities by profenofos treatment in the tobacco white /uniFB02 y
 Bemisia tabaci (Genn) implications for routine biochemical monitoring of these enzymes. Pest. Biochem. Physiol. 40, 198 -204.
 Crofton, K.M., Craft, E.S., Hedge, J.M., Gennings, C., Simmons, J.E., Carchman, R.A., Carter Jr., W.H., DeVito, M.J., 2005. Thyroid-hormone-disrupting chemicals: evidence for dose-dependent additivity or synergism. Environ. Health Perspect. 113, 1549 -1554.
 Darvesh, S., Darvesh, K.V., McDonald, R.S., Mataija, D., Walsh, R., Mothana, S., Lockridge, O., Martin, E., 2008. Carbamates with differential mechanism of inhibition toward acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase. J. Med. Chem. 51, 4200 -4212.
 Deneer, J.W., 2000. Toxicity of mixtures of pesticides in aquatic systems. Pest. Manag. Sci. 56, 516 -520.
 Domingues, I., Agra, A.R., Monaghan, K., Soares, A.M.V.M., Nogueira, A.J.A., 2010. Cholinesterase and glutathione-S-transferase activities in freshwater invertebrates as biomarkers to assess pesticide contamination. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 29, 5 -18.
 Eggen, R.I.L., Behra, R., Burkhardt-Holm, P., Escher, B.I., Schweigert, N., 2004. Challenges in ecotoxicology: mechanistic understanding will help overcome the newest challenges. Enviro. Sci. Technol. 35, 58A -64.
 Ellman, G., Courtney, K., Andres, J., Featherstone, R., 1961. A new and colorimetric determination of acetylcholinesterase activity. Biochem. Pharmacol. 7, 88 -795. Erdman, A.R., 2004. Insecticides, In: Dart, R.C. (Ed.), Medical Toxicology. 3rd edn. Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 1475 -1496.
 Forget, J., Pavillon, J.F., Beliaeff, B., Bocquene, G., 1999. Joint action of pollutant combinations (pesticides and metals) on survival (LC50 values) and acetylcholinesterase activity of Tigriopus brevicornis (Copepoda: harpacticoida). Envrion. Toxicol. Chem. 18, 912 -918.
 - Fukuto, T.R., 1990. Mechanism of action of organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides. Environ. Health Perspect. 87, 245 -254.
 Gowda, A.S.R., Somashekar, R.K., 2012. Evaluation of pesticide residues in farmgate samples of vegetables in Karnataka, India. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 89 (3), 626 -632.
 Gruber, S.J., Munn, M.D., 1998. Organophosphate and carbamates insecticides in agricultural waters and cholinesterase (ChE) inhibition in common carp ( Cyprinus carpio ). Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 35, 391 -396.
 - Hernandez, A.F., et al., 2013. Toxic effects of pesticide mixtures at a molecular level: their relevance to human health. Toxicology 307, 136 -145.
 Hotta, Y., Ezaki, S., Atomi, H., Imanaka, T., 2002. Extremely stable and versatile carboxylesterase from a hyperthermophilic archaeon. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68 (8), 3925 -3931.
 Khan, H.A.A., Akram, W., Shad, S.A., Lee, J.J., 2013. Correction: insecticide mixtures could enhance the toxicity of insecticides in a resistant dairy population of Musca domestica L. PLoS One 8 (4), e60929.
 Kok, F.N., Hasirci, V., 2004. Determination of binary pesticide mixtures by an acetylcholinesterase-choline oxidase biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 19, 661 -665.
 Kortenkamp, A., Backhaus, T., Faust, M., 2009. State of the Art Report on Mixture Toxicity /C0 Final Report. , pp. 391.
 - Kralj, M.B., Trebse, P., Franko, M., 2006. Oxidation as a pre-step in determination of organophosphorus compounds by the AChE-TLS bioassay. Acta Chim. Solv. 53, 43 -51.
- Kudsk, P., Andersen, H.R., Cedergreen, N., Mathiassen, S.K., Mohlenberg, F., Streibig, J. C., Vinggaard, A.M., 2005. Combined Effects of Pesticides. Danish Environmental Protection Agency doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ieam.1329/full (No. 98).
- Kuhr, R.J., Dorough, H.W., 1976. Mode of action. In: Kuhr, R.J., Dorough, H.W. (Eds.), Carbamate Insecticides: Chemistry, Biochemistry and Toxicology. CRC Press, Cleveland, pp. 41 -70.
- Kumar, A., Chapman, J.C., 2001. Profenofos residues in wild /uniFB01 sh from cotton-growing areas of New South Wales, Australia. J. Environ. Qual. 30, 740 -750.
- Kumar, A., Doan, H., Barnes, M., Chapman, J.C., Kookana, R.S., 2010. Response and recovery of acetylcholinesterase activity in freshwater shrimp, Paratya australiensis (Decapoda: atyidae) exposed to selected anti-cholinesterase insecticides. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 73, 1503 -1510.
- Kumari, B., Kumar, R., Madan, V.K., Singh, R., Singh, J., Kathpal, T.S., 2003. Magnitude of pesticidal contamination in winter vegetables from Hisar, Haryana. Environ. Monit. Assess. 87 (3), 311 -318.
 Laetz, C.A., Baldwin, D.H., Collier, T.K., Hebert, V., Stark, J.D., Scholz, N.L., 2009. The synergistic toxicity of pesticide mixtures: implications for risk assessment and the conservation of endangered paci /uniFB01 c salmon. Environ. Health Perspect. 117, 348 -353.
 - Laetz, C.A., Baldwin, D.H., Hebert, V., Stark, J.D., Scholz, N.L., 2013. Interactive neurobehavioral toxicity of diazinon, malathion, and ethoprop to juvenile coho Salmon. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 2925 -2931.
- Lari, S.Z., Khan, N.A., Gandhi, K.N., Meshram, T.S., Thacker, N.P., 2014. Comparison of pesticide residues in surface water and ground water of agriculture intensive areas. J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng. 12 (1), 11.
- Loewe, S., Muischnek, H., 1926. Über kombinationswirkungen I: mitteilung: hilfsmittel der fragestellung. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch. Exp. Pathol. Pharmakol 114, 313 -326.
- Lydy, M., Belden, J., Wheelock, C., Hammock, B., Denton, D., 2004. Challenges in regulating pesticide mixtures. Ecol. Soc. 9 (6), 1.
- Mandal, K., Singh, B., 2010. Magnitude and frequency of pesticide residues in farmgate samples of cauli /uniFB02 ower in Punjab, India. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 85 (4), 423 -426.
- Martin, T., Ochou, O.G., Vaissayre, M., Fournier, D., 2003. Organophosphorus insecticides synergise pyrethroids in the resistant strain of cotton bollworm, Helicoverpa armigera (Lepidoptera: noctuidae) from West Africa. J. Econ. Entomol. 92, 468 -474.
- Matsumura, F., 1985. Toxicology of Insecticides, 2nd ed. Plenum Press, New York. Mileson, B.E., et al., 1998. Common mechanism of toxicity: a case study of organophosphorus pesticides. Toxicol. Sci. 41, 8 -20.
- NEPCC,, 1999. National Environment Protection (Assessment of Site Contamination) Measure. National Environment Protection Council, Adelaide.
 Ono, M., Richman, J.S., Siegfried, B., 1994. Characterization of General Esterases from Susceptible and Parathion-Resistant Strains of the Greenbug (Homoptera: Aphididae). . http://digitalcommons. unl. edu/entomologyfacpub/58.
 Phyu, Y.L., Palmer, C.G., Warne M.St.J. Hose, G.C., Chapman, J.C., Lim, R.P., 2011. A comparison of mixture toxicity assessment Examining the chronic toxicity of atrazine, permethrin and chlorothalonil in mixtures to Ceriodaphnia cf dubia . Chemosphere 85, 1568 -1573.
 Richardson, J.R., Chambers, H.W., Chambers, J.E., 2001. Analysis of the additivity of in vitro inhibition of cholinesterase by mixtures of chlorpyrifos-oxon and azinphos-methyl-oxon. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 172, 128 -139.
 - Riddles, P.W., Blakeley, R.L., Zerner, B., 1979. Ellman's reagent: 5,5'-dithiobis(2nitrobenzoic acid) -a reexamination. Anal. Biochem. 94 (1), 75 -81.
 Schägger, H., Jagow, G.V., 1991. Blue native electrophoresis for isolation of membrane protein complexes in enzymatically active form. Anal. Biochem. 199 (2), 223 -231.
 Scholz, N.L., Hopkins, W., 2006. Ecotoxicology of acetylcholinestrase pesticides: data gaps and research challenges. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 25, 1185 -1186.
 - Schulz, R., 2004. Field studies on exposure effects, and risk mitigation of aquatic nonpoint-source insecticide pollution: a review. J. Environ. Qual. 33, 419 -448.
- Sogorb, M.A., Vilanova, E., 2002. Enzymes involved in the detoxi /uniFB01 cation of organophosphorus, carbamate and pyrethroid insecticides through hydrolysis. Toxicol. Lett. 128, 215 -228.
 Spehar, R.L., Fiandt, J.T., 1986. Acute and chronic effects of water quality criteriaBased metal mixtures on three aquatic species. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 5, 917 -931.
 Tripathi, M., Pandey, R., Ambesh, S.P., Pandey, M., 2006. A mixture of organophosphate and pyrethroid intoxication requiring intensive care unit admission: a diagnostic dilemma and therapeutic approach. Anaesth. Analg. 103, 410 -412.
 - Walker, C.H., Hopkin, S.P., Sibly, R.M., Peakall, D.B., 2001. Principles of Ecotoxicology. Taylor and Francis, London.
- Warne, M.S.J., Hawker, D.W., 1995. The number of components in a mixture determines whether synergistic and antagonistic or additive toxicity predominate: the funnel hypothesis. Ecotox. Environ. Saf. 31, 23 -28.
- Woods, M., Kumar, A., Correll, R., 2002. Acute toxicity mixtures of chlorpyrifos profenefos, and endosulfan to Ceriodaphnia dubia . Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 68, 801 -808.
 Zonal Conference, 2013. Zonal conference for kharif-2013 on inputs (Plant protection and pesticides). Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage, Faridabad, India, Feb.