
 
 ELSEVIER
 ## Induction  of  micronuclei by five pyrethroid  insecticides in  whole-blood  and isolated human  lymphocyte cultures
 J.  Surrall6s  a,  N. Xamena a,  A. Creus a,  j.  Catalfin  b,  H. Norppa  b,  R. Marcos  a,,
 - a  Unitat de  Gen~tica, Departament de  Gen~tica  i de  Mierobiologia, Edifici Cn, Universitat Aut~noma de  Barcelona, 08193  Bellaterra (Cerdanyola  del  Vall~s), Spain
 b  Department of Industrial Hygiene  and Toxicology, Finnish Institute of  Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland
 Received  3  June  1994; revision received 13  September  1994; accepted 14  September  1994
 ## Abstract
 Five  pyrethroid insecticides: cypermethrin, deltamethrin, fenpropathrin, fenvalerate and permethrin, were tested for  their ability to  induce  micronuclei in  both  whole-blood (WB; three donors) and isolated human lymphocyte (IL, 2 donors)  cultures, by using  the  cytokinesis-block method with 6 /zg/ml  cytochalasin B (Cyt-B). Fenvalerate and permethrin were tested with  two different concentrations of  Cyt-B  (3  and 6/xg/ml).
 At the concentration ranges  tested, all  the  five  pyrethroids induced  clear  dose dependent  cytotoxic effects, fenpropathrin being  the  most  toxic. Nuclear  division index  (NDI)  and  the  newly  introduced index  of  cytotoxicity, the cytokinesis block  proliferation i dex  (CBPI),  reflected the  dose  dependency  more accurately than  the  percentage of binucleated cells did.  CBPI is  similar to  NDI  except  that it  estimates the  average  number of  cell divisions that  the cell population has  gone through, and,  therefore, classifies both  trinucleate and tetranucleate cells into  the  same category.
 Cypermethrin  and fenpropathrin slightly increased the  number of  MN and micronucleated cells in  WB  lymphocyte  cultures from two out  of  the  three donors.  Deltamethrin produced  a positive response  only  in  WB  cultures of one donor  and in  IL  cultures of  another donor.  Permethrin gave  mostly  negative results, although it  increased the MN  frequency in  WB  cultures of  one  donor  when 6/~g/ml  Cyt-B  was used.  Fenvalerate did  not  significantly induce MN.  With certain reservations to  the  purity and isomer  composition of  each pesticide, the  existing information appears  to  support the  idea  that pyrethroid insecticides have  a  weak (cypermethrin, deltamethrin and fenpropathrin) or  nule  (fenvalerate and permethrin) genotoxic activity in  vitro.
 Keywords: Micronucleus; Human  lymphocyte; Pyrethroid insecticide; Cytochalasin-B; Cytotoxicity
 ## I.  Introduction
 Synthetic pyrethroids are  highly  active  insecticides characterized by  photostability, relatively
 *  Corresponding author.
 low mammalian  toxicity and  low  production  of residues in  plants . Deltamethrin,  as  an  example  of  a  synthetic pyrethroid, is  600 times more  active  than DDT against Anopheles stephensi .
 Because  of their  obvious advantages,  pyre-
 throid insecticides are  becoming  widespread  and, therefore, studies on  the  biological effects of  these pesticides are  of  immediate  concern.  Numerous studies on their toxicity both  in  insects and mammals have been reported  in the literature . The  genotoxicity of these  chemicals  has been an important research line in  our  laboratory (Barcelona)  during the last  10  years . Although pyrethroid  insecticides have  consistently shown negative results in  microbial  genotoxicity tests, the  outcome of  other  assays  has  been  variable and it  has  not  been possible  to  draw definite conclusions about  the  genotoxicity of  this group  of  pesticides.
 The present  study  deals  with  the  genotoxicity of  five  synthetic pyrethroid insecticides currently used  in  modern agriculture in  great extent: cypermethrin  (Cyp),  deltamethrin (Del), fenpropathrin (Fep),  fenvalerate (Fev),  and permethrin  (Per). These chemicals  are carboxylic acid  esters with three chirial centres located at  carbons  1  and 3  of the  cyclopropane ring  and at  the  a-carbon of  the alcohol  moiety.  All  of  them,  except  permethrin, have a cyano group which has been related to mammalian  toxicity (see  Fig.  1).
 The  genetic  end-point  chosen for  this  study was  the micronucleus  assay  in cultured  human iymphocytes. Micronuclei (MN) are  acentric chromosome  fragments  or whole  chromosomes that  are  left behind  during  mitotic cellular division  and appear  in the  cytoplasm  of interphase cells as small  additional nuclei. The cytokinesis block  micronucleus  (CBMN) assay  ,  using cytochalasin-B (Cyt-B)  to identify cells that  have divided once in  vitro, has made  the  identification f MN a useful  tool  for assessing genetic damage.
 Among  the  five  pyrethroids studied here,  Fen and Per  have  earlier been  shown to  induce  MN in human  lymphocytes  .  Thus, the main  aim of this study  was  to investigate the ability of the five pyrethroids to  induce  MN and to  reevaluate the MN induction by  Fev and Per  by  using  a  different
 
 ## Cypermethrin
 
 ## Deltamethrin
 
 ## Fenpropathrin
 
 ## Fenvalerate
 
 ## Permethrin
 Fig.  1.  Chemical  structure of  the  pyrethroid insecticides tested.
 concentration of  Cyt-B  and a different methodology.
 Previous  studies have demonstrated  that  the concentration of  Cyt-B is  an important  variable affecting the efficiency of the cytokinesis block   and the  baseline and induced  frequency of MN .  We  have sug-
 0
 O
 0
 O
 CN
 CN
 CN
 gested  that, especially when a suboptimal Cyt-B concentration (such  as  3  ~g/ml)  is used  to  block cytokinesis, binucleated cells that  have actually divided  twice  are  included in  the  scoring . This  fact could  lead  to  an overestimation  of  genetic damage .
 Migliore et al.  recommended  that whole-blood (WB) cultures  hould be  used  in  the CBMN assay. However, it was recenty suggested that  the  sensitivity of  the  CBMN assay  may be enhanced  by using  isolated lymphocytes (IL)  instead of  WB  . Therefore, the  five pyrethroids were tested in  both  WB and IL cultures, to  see  if one type  of  culture is  superior to the  other.
 ## 2.  Materials  and methods
 ## Cytogenetic  methods
 Blood was  obtained  by venipuncture  from healthy non-smoking  donors  aged  from 25 to  30 years  and with  no previous known  contact with high  concentrations of  pesticides.
 WB  cultures were set  up as  described by Surrall6s et  al. . Briefly, 0.5  ml of  blood  was added to 4.5 ml of  culture medium  containing RPMI 1640,  15% heat-inactivated foetal  calf serum (FCS),  antibiotics, L-glutamine and phytohaemagglutinin (PHA).  IL  cultures were  based  on the  method described by Lindholm  et  al. . Mononucleated  cells were isolated in Lymphoprep  and a total of  one  million cells were added to  5 ml PRMI 1640  medium  supplemented with 15%  FCS, antibiotics, L-glutamine, and PHA. All the  cultures were incubated at  37°C for 72 h.
 Treatments were performed  at  24 h after culture initation and  were  prolonged until the  end  of the  culture. Cyt-B  (Sigma,  St.  Louis, MO,  USA) was added  at  44  h,  at  a  concentration of  6/zg/ml (all treatments) or  3 /zg/ml  (parallel cultures of Fev and  Per, donor  C).
 The WB cultures were harvested at  72 h by gently rinsing the  cells in  serum-free RPMI  1640 medium  at  room temperature. Following a short hypotonic treatment with  KCL  (0.075 M  at  room temperature), the  cells were  fixed three times in  a solution consisting of  5 parts of  methanol  and 1 part  of  acetic acid. Finally, the  centrifuged cells were dropped  onto  clean  slides and stained with Giemsa . The IL cultures were harvested by centrifugation and,  after two rinses in  PBS at  room temperature, the  cells were centrifuged  irectly onto  slides using  a cytocentrifuge (Shandon  Cytospin 3,  Astmoor,  UK; 5  min at  500 rpm),  fixed with  methanol, and stained in May-Griinwald-Giemsa .
 ## Treatments
 Cypermethrin  ((R,S)-a-cyano-3-phenoxy benzyl-2,2-dimethyl (1R,1S)-cis,trans-3-(2,2-dichlorovinyl)cyclopropanecarboxylate, CAS No. 5231507-8,  purity  90%),  deltamethrin (S-a-cyano-3phenoxybenzyl-(1 R)-cis-3-(2,2-dibromovinyl)-2,2dimethylcyclopropanecarboxylate, CAS No. 52918-63-5, purity  99.9%),  fenpropathrin (acyano-3-phenoxybenzyl-l-2,2,3,3-tetramethylcyclopropanecarboxylate, CAS  No. 39515-41-8, purity 99.6%),  fenvalerate ((R,S)-a-cyano-3-phenoxybenzyl(1R,1S)-2-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-methyl-l-butyrate, CAS  No. 51630-58-1,  purity 97.9%) and permethrin (3-phenoxybenzyl-(1R,1S)-cis,trans3-(2,2-dichlorovinyl)-2,2-dimethylcyclopropanecarboxylate, CAS No. 52645-33-1, purity  97%) were  obtained  from  Dr. Ehrenstorfer GmbH (Augsburg, Germany).
 Serial dilutions were  made in  dimethyl sulphoxide  (DMSO, purity &gt; 99%,  Panreac, Barcelona, Spain)  in  sterile conditions and 50/zl (1% v/v)  were added to  each  culture. Negative and  positive control  cultures receiving 50  ~1 DMSO and  mytomicin C (MMC,  Sigma,  St. Louis, MO,  USA), respectively, were also  established in parallel. The final concentrations of  MMC were 0.4 /zM  for  the WB and 0.6 /zM  for  the IL cultures
 The  highest concentration of each pesticide was chosen  taking into account pH changes, maximum solubility inDMSO and  medium,  reduction of  mitotic index  by  &gt; 50%, and general toxicity found  in  this and previous studies conducted  in our  laboratory   and  elsewhere .  Although pH  changes were  not marked at  the  concentrations chosen, doses  higher than 200 /.~g/ml  resulted in chemical  precipitation  (Cyp and Del) or in complete  lack  of cell growth  (Fep,  Fev and Per).
 A  range  of  5-6  concentrations (including negative  controls) of each pesticide was  studied  in the  WB cultures from the  three donors.  The two highest effective doses  of  each  pesticide were also tested in  the  IL  cultures, with  two donors.
 ## Cell scoring
 Toxicity was evaluated by classifying 500 cells according  to the number  of nuclei. Two  well known cytotoxicity indexes were used:  percentage of binucleated (BN) cells  and nuclear  division index (NDI), which was calculated following the  formula: NDI  = (MI + 2MII + 3MIII  + 4MIV)/total, where MI-MIV represent the number of cells with one to four nuclei  .  A  new  index for  measuring  cell proliferation kinetics was also  applied, which was  called cytokinesis block proliferation i dex (CBPI).  This  new index is  based on the  formula: CBPI = [MI + 2MII + 3 (MIII  + MIV)]/total, where MIII and MIV are equally considered to  be in  their third cell cycle. While NDI  is  the average  number  of nuclei  per cell, CBPI  indicates the  average  number of  cell cycles undergone  by a given  cell, which may be biologically  more  relevant in the case of cytokinesisblocked  cells.
 The induction of  MN  was evaluated by scoring a total of 1000 binucleated (BN) cells with  well preserved cytoplasm  at  1000  ×  magnification. BN cells were analyzed  according  to  the  number of MN so that  total  MN counts  (MN)  and total number  of micronucleated  BN cells  (BNMN) could  be recorded. Only binucleated cells were included in  the  microscopic analysis.
 The  WB and  IL experiments  were done  in different laboratories (Barcelona  and  Helsinki, respectively) but  using  the  same pesticide stocks. All  scoring was performed  by the  same person  on coded slides.
 ## Statistical analysis
 The  frequency  of BNMN and  MN in the treated  cultures were compared with their  re- spective controls by  using the  'one  tailed' Fisher's exact test  and  the Kastenbaum  and  Bowman   test, respectively. Correlation coefficients were  calculated by  plotting toxicity indexes against pesticide concentrations, and  the slopes  were compared to zero  using  the t-test with the  null hyphotesis considering that  pesticide concentrations and toxicity indexes  are  not  related. Correlation coefficients derived  from the  three  different  toxicity indexes were  compared  by  performing an analysis of  variance (ANOVA).
 ## 3.  Results
 Tables  1-5  show the  results obtained from the WB cultures with the  five  pyrethroids tested by using  6/~g/ml  Cyt-B.  Table  6 shows MN induction by  Fen and Per  in  WB  cultures of  donor  C at two concentrations of  Cyt-B.  The results obtained with the IL cultures of two  donors with two concentrations of  the  five insecticides are  summarized  in Table 7. None  of the five  pyrethroid tested was able  to  induce  a clear dose-dependent increase of MN frequencies, although  Cyp  (200 ~g/ml) and Fep (10  and 50 ~g/ml)  produced  a slight but statistically significant increase in the frequency of  MN and BNMN in  WB cultures of two out of the three  donors.  A  significant increase  was  also found for Del  (100 and  200 /zg/ml), both in  the  WB and in  IL,  but  only  in cultures of one donor in each case.  A  slightly positive result was likewise obtained for  Per  only at  one concentration with  one donor in  the  WB study  and,  therefore, this increase can be considered as marginal.  A  possible  suggestion of an effect was also  seen  for  Fev (Tables 4,  6,  and 7) but no statistically significance differences were obtained. MMC showed a highly  significant induction of  MN with  all donors  (P  &lt; 0.001).
 From cytotoxicity data  presented in  Tables  1-5, correlation coefficients were calculated by plotting  pesticide concentrations against  the three toxicity indexes. The results of this  analysis are shown in  Table 8.  From  these  correlations, it  is obvious  that  the  percentage of  BN  cells did not reflect the reduction of cell  proliferation since the  correlation coefficients were quite low and in
 Table 1 Induction of  micronuclei and cytotoxicity by 48-h  treatment with  cypermethrin in  human whole-blood  lymphocyte  cultures
 | CBPI                       | 2.17 2.06 2.09 1.87 1.62 1.40 2.07                                 | 2.26 2.32 2.17 1.86 1.57 1.27 2.00                                 | 2.21 2.13 2.07 1.82 1.55 2.11                                     | |----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------| | NDI                        | 2.29 2.15 2.17 1.88 1.62 1.40 2.14                                 | 2.38 2.46 2.27 1.89 1.57 1.27 2.08                                 | 2.35 2.25 2.13 1.86 1.56 2.17                                     | | % BN 65.8 66.6 70.0 71.0   | 60.4 39.2 64.8                                                     | 66.4 63.6 75.0 76.0 56.4 27.0 65.6                                 | 62.4 68.6 68.2 61.2 54.2 69.8                                     | | 4                          | 62 47 41 9 0 0 38                                                  | 62 67 48 15 0 0 39                                                 | 69 60 29 18 1 34                                                  | | cells nuclei 3             | 65 51 57 30 4 1 67                                                 | 86 105 58 11 2 0 48                                                | 77 50 68 33 2 68                                                  | | Distribution of No. 2      | 329 333 350 355 302 196 324                                        | 332 318 375 380 282 135 328                                        | 312 343 341 306 271 349                                           | | accordingto 1              | 44 69 52 106 194 303 71                                            | 20 10 19 94 216 365 85                                             | 42 47 62 147 226 49                                               | | BNMN                       | 6 5 9 9 7 20 ** 49 ***                                             | 4 6 8 2 5 9 46 ***                                                 | 6 7 7 6 6 47***                                                   | | MN                         | 6 5 10 9 8 23 ** 52 ***                                            | 4 6 9 3 6 12 * 48 ***                                              | 7 7 7 7 6 50***                                                   | | >3                         | 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                      | 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                      | 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                       | | cells 3                    | 0 0 0 0 0 1 1                                                      | 0 0 0 0 0 1 0                                                      | 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                       | | of BN No. MN 2             | 0 0 1 0 1 1 1                                                      | 0 0 1 1 1 1 2                                                      | 1 0 0 1 0 3                                                       | | 1                          | 6 5 8 9 6 18 47                                                    | 4 6 7 1 4 7 44                                                     | 5 7 7 5 6 44                                                      | | Distribution accordingto 0 | 994 995 991 991 993 980 951                                        | 996 994 992 998 995 991 954                                        | 994 993 993 994 994 T 953                                         | | Treatment                  | DMS0 1% 10/~g/ml 25 ~tg/ml 50/zg/ml 100 p,g/ml 200/zg/ml MMC 0.4#M | DMSO 1% 10 ~g/ml 25/xg/ml 50/zg/ml 100 txg/ml 200/.Lg/ml MMC 0.4~M | DMS0 1% 10 ~zg/ml 25/xg/ml 50/xg/ml 100/zg/ml 200/~g/ml MMC 0.4~M |
 T, 100%  toxicity; MN,  total  MN;  BNMN, binucleated cells with MN; %BN, percentage  of BN  cells; NDI,  nuclear  division index;  CBPI,  cytokinesis blocked proliferation index;  Probabilities: *, **  ***= P &lt; 0.05,  0.01,  0.001 respectively (Fisher's exact  test  and  Kastenbaum and Bowman test  for BNMN and MN
 respectively).
 e-. e. E e. .=\_ e. o "5 Table 2
 |               | o o o o o ~ o   | o o o o o o o   | |---------------|-----------------|-----------------| | ~ o o o ~ o ~ | o o o o ~ o o   | o o o ~ o o o   | |               |                 | ~ o o ~         |
 B
 Legend: see Table 1.
 O 0 .=\_ r~ i. t. e~ e~ e. e. e. "T a E e~. ~ \_ b-.-
 | CBPI  5  13%9  2.08  15.  333413  1  2  % BN  3  37  59.6  61.2  58.4  S  3  5  3017  3  9801292  4  4  Distribution of cells  3  3910  G＆ε  切  6  778.8  49  00  8  8  3.37  就然找  3  34  2  2866 18  亿79m1%  6  1  21**  *91  88568  53５  6  74  ***ES  23***  ***6L  ***OS  MN  *1  ８９６６9  ５4５  6  7  6  74  1  00000  ¥000000  000000  0  3  0000  0  00000  0  00000  0  according to No. MN  2  0  11  0  1  4  0  0  02  3  10  0  0  3  874  6  7  45  5  ２５  6  19  3  56  15  7  4  4  明州T9  T  的始  -0  MMC 0.4 µM  MMC 0.4 µM  MMC 0.4 µM  DMSO 1%  100 µg/ml  Treatment  DMSO 1%  100 µg/ml  5µg/mll  10 µg/ml  5 µg/ml  10 µg/ml  /81 s  10 µg/ml  A   | |--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
 B
 C
 i " 2
 Table  4 Induction of  micronuclei and cytotoxicity by 48-h  treatment with  fenvalerate in  human whole-blood  lymphocyte  cultures
 Legend:  see  Table  1.
 | 2.08 2.16 1.91 1.73 1.46 2.08                            | 1.95 2.00 1.96 1.55                                        | 2.05      | 2.06 2.10 1.84 1.85 1.69 1.76                            | |----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------| | 2.18 2.30 1.96 1.76 1.46 2.19                            | 2.02 2.08 2.03 1.55                                        | 2.14      | 2.17 2.25 1.89 1.89 1.70 1.80                            | | 59.6 60.4 67.0 61.6 45.2 57.2                            | 65.8 73.4 74.0 52.6                                        | 67.0      | 66.4 63.6 63.2 71.0 63.8 60.8                            | | 50 68 28 14 0 54                                         | 36 37 38 2                                                 | 41        | 49 72 26 19 7 19                                         | | 3 70 72 31 14 2 74                                       | 37 30 16 3                                                 | 55        | 54 49 25 17 6 20                                         | | 2 298 302 335 308 226 286                                | 329 367 370 263                                            | 335       | 332 318 316 355 319 304                                  | | 1 82 58 106 164 272 86                                   | 98 66 76 232                                               | 69        | 65 53 133 109 168 157                                    | | 8 9 10 7 11 49 ***                                       | 5 10 6 10                                                  | 76 ***    | 2 2 5 2 6 48 ***                                         | | 8 12 10 7 17 53 ***                                      | 5 10 6 12                                                  | 79 ***    | 2 2 6 2 8 51 ***                                         | | >3 0 0 0 0 1 0                                           | 0 0 0 0                                                    | 0         | 0 0 0 0 0 0                                              | | 3 0 1 0 0 1 0                                            | 0 0 0 0                                                    | 0         | 0 0 0 0 0 0                                              | | 2 0 1 0 0 1 4                                            | 0 0 0 2                                                    | 3         | 0 0 1 0 2 3                                              | | 1 8 7 10 7 8 45                                          | 5 10 6 8                                                   | 73        | 2 2 4 2 4 45                                             | | 0 992 991 990 993 989 951                                | 995 990 994 990 T                                          | T 924     | 998 998 995 998 994 952                                  | | DMSO 1% 10/zg/ml 25 ~g/ml 50/zg/ml 100 tzg/ml MMC 0.4txM | DMSO 1% 10/~g/ml 25 ixg/ml 50 tzg/ml 100 i~g/ml 200 p.g/ml | MMC 0.4~M | DMSO 1% 10/xg/ml 25/zg/ml 50 ~g/ml 100 txg/ml MMC 0.4izM | | A                                                        | B                                                          | C         |                                                          |
 tr~
 | CBPI                                                   | 2.08                                  | 1.95 #   |                                 | 2.08 1.98 2.10 1.80 53                | |--------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------| | NDI                                                    | 134切3                                 | 55       | 2.14                            |                                       | | % BN 59.6                                              |                                       | 聪州光购     | 67.0                            | 937                                   | | 508                                                    | S                                     | 51       | 4                               |                                       | | -70425 3 3                                             | 忆                                     | 1        | 5                               | 43５18:0                               | | Distribution of cells 298 3 3 2                        | .                                     |          | 3                               | 3                                     | | 1 2                                                    |                                       | 8.53m 6  |                                 |                                       | | 8 12                                                   | 49***                                 | ５5       | 76 ***                          | ２２62 6                                | | 饥8                                                     | ** 4 3                                | ５５１      | **6L                            | ** ２２6２ 6 5                           | | -3 V                                                   | 0000 ¥0                               | 0000     | 0                               | 000000                                | | 3 0 0 0 0                                              | 0                                     | 0 0 0 0  | 0                               | 0 00000                               | | 2 02 0 1                                               | 4                                     | 0 0 0 0  | 3                               | 0 00003                               | | Distribution of BN cells  according to No. MN 8 100 4门 | 45                                    | 552 1    | 3                               |                                       | | 0                                                      | 一m%T9                                 | 奶奶哪TT4   |                                 | 弧始始                                   | | Treatment                                              | MMC 0.4 µM DMSO 1% 100 µg/ml /3r1 007 | DMSO 1%  | MMC 0.4 µM 100 µg/ml  200 µg/ml | MMC 0.4 µM DMSO 1% 100 µg/ml 10 µg/ml | | Donor A                                                |                                       |          |                                 | C                                     |
 B
 2
 Table  6 Induction of  micronuclei and cytotoxicity by fenvalerate and permethrin  at  two concentrations of  cytochalasin-B in  whole-blood cultures
 | Treatment      | 3 ~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 3 ~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 3 ~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 3 ~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 3 ~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 6/~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 6/~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 6/~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 6/~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 6/~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | 6/~g/ml Cytochalasin-B   | |----------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------| | Treatment      | MN                       | BNMN                     | % BN                     | NDI                      | CBPI                     | MN                       | BNMN                     | % BN                     | NDI                      | CBPI                     |                          | | DMSO 1%        | 11                       | 11                       | 55.4                     | 1.70                     | 1.66                     | 2                        | 2                        | 66.4                     | 2.17                     | 2.07                     |                          | | Fev 10/xg/ml   | 5                        | 5                        | 45.6                     | 1.58                     | 1.56                     | 2                        | 2                        | 63.6                     | 2.25                     | 2.11                     |                          | | Fev 25/zg/ml   | 7                        | 7                        | 45.0                     | 1.57                     | 1.54                     | 6                        | 5                        | 63.2                     | 1.89                     | 1.84                     |                          | | Fev 50 ~g/ml   | 4                        | 4                        | 49.0                     | 1.62                     | 1.59                     | 2                        | 2                        | 71.0                     | 1.89                     | 1.85                     |                          | | Fev 100 #g/rnl | 4                        | 4                        | 37.4                     | 1.41                     | 1.40                     | 8                        | 6                        | 63.8                     | 1.70                     | 1.69                     |                          | | Per 10/xg/ml   | 10                       | 9                        | 52.2                     | 1.63                     | 1.61                     | 2                        | 2                        | 66.2                     | 1.98                     | 1.91                     |                          | | Per 25 ~g/ml   | 4                        | 4                        | 43.2                     | 1.55                     | 1.53                     | 6                        | 6                        | 67.2                     | 2.23                     | 2.10                     |                          | | Per 50 p~g/ml  | 5                        | 5                        | 46.4                     | 1.59                     | 1.56                     | 2                        | 2                        | 65.6                     | 1.84                     | 1.80                     |                          | | Per 100 p.g/ml | 5                        | 5                        | 39.2                     | 1.42                     | 1.41                     | 6                        | 6                        | 53.2                     | 1.58                     | 1.57                     |                          | | MMC 0.4p~M     | 64 ***                   | 59 ***                   | 58.6                     | 1.86                     | 1.81                     | 51 ***                   | 48 ***                   | 60.8                     | 1.80                     | 1.76                     |                          |
 Legend:  see  Table 1.
 some cases  positive, with  only  6 out  of  15 being statistically significant. On  the  other  hand,  both NDI  and CBPI  were reduced  in  a linear manner with increasing concentrations of  the  five  pesticides. The ANOVA showed no significant difference between correlation coefficients calculated for  NDI  and CBPI  but  both  indexes were significantly  different from the  correlation coefficients calculated for  the  percentage of BN  cells (P  &lt; 0.01).
 ## 4.  Discussion
 Initially considered  to be non  hazardous  to mammals  and human  health, pyrethroid insecticides  were regarded  as non-carcinogenic to humans.  Further  studies  of synthetic pyrethroids have,  however,  revealed a possible genotoxic activity in  a wide range  of  organisms. Most of  the pyrethroids were  more recently classified in  group 3 by IARC  ,  since  the studies performed could not be interpreted as showing either the presence  or  absence  of  a carcinogenic effect, because  of  major  qualitative or  quantitative limitations.  Therefore,  and  bearing in  mind the widespread environmental  occurrence  of pyrethroid  insecticides, the study of their  possible genotoxicity has  been of  immediate  concern  during  the  last two decades.
 The data  reported on the  genotoxicity of  synthetic pyrethroids are rather  controversial, depending  on the  genetic system  or  the  assay  used. Mutagenicity studies in  bacteria have been performed for Cyp, Del, Fev  and  Per, and  they consistently gave negative results . In Drosophila melanogaster, the  sex-linked recessive  lethal test  was  negative for  Fep, Fev, and Per,  but positive for  Cyp, while none of these four  pyrethroids induced  nondisjunction .  Only  Fep  has been tested in  the  somatic  mutation  and recombination test  (SMART) of D. melanogaster, with a negative outcome .  In  plant  meristerns, Cyp induced  mitotic abnormalities in Vicia faba   and Del,  chromosome  aberrations (CA) in Allium  cepa .
 In Chinese  hamster  cells treated in  vitro, Fev inhibited intercellular communication in fibroblasts, whereas Del did not ; Del,  Fev and Per  were  negative in  the  hprt mutation  assay  in  V79  ceils, but induced  CA  in
 Table  7 Induction of  micronuclei and cytotoxicity by 48-h  treatment with  the  five  pyrethroids in  isolated human lymphocyte  cultures
 | CBPI                                                                                                                                                                 | 1.60 1.26 1.20 1.42 1.34 1.43 1.14 1.24 1.27 1.40 1.10 1.70 1.80 1.06 1.07 1.37 1.28 1.26 1.05 1.19 1.09 1.28 1.09 1.78                                       | |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| | NDI 1.61 1.26 1.20 1.42 1.34 1.43 1.14 1.24                                                                                                                          | 1.27 1.40 1.10 1.71 1.85 1.06 1.07 1.37 1.28 1.26 1.05 1.19 1.09 1.28 1.09 1.82                                                                               | | % BN 58.6 25.8 19.6 41.8 31.8 42.6 11.6 24.2 25.6 40.4 10.0 65.2                                                                                                     | 67.2 6.0 6.4 36.6 28.2 25.8 4.8 18.4 8.8 27.8 8.4 65.2                                                                                                        | | 4 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4                                                                                                                                            | 24 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 20                                                                                                                                     | | cells nuclei 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 9                                                                                                                               | 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 12                                                                                                                                      | | Distribution of No. 2 293 129 98 209 159 213 58 121 128 202 50 326                                                                                                   | 336 30 32 183 141 129 24 92 44 139 42 326                                                                                                                     | | accordingto 1 202 371 402 291 341 287 442 379 369 298 450 161                                                                                                        | 132 470 467 317 359 371 476 407 456 361 457 141                                                                                                               | | BNMN 5 2 2 3 2 5 4                                                                                                                                                   | 4 4 32 *** 4 7 9 12" 9 10 6 8 45 ***                                                                                                                          | | MN 6 2 2 3 2 8 4                                                                                                                                                     | 4 5 36 *** 4 7 13 * 13 * 9 10 7 8 47 ***                                                                                                                      | | >3 0 0 0 0 0 1 0                                                                                                                                                     | 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                                                                                                       | | cells 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                                                                                                              | 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                                                                                                         | | of BN No. MN 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1                                                                                                                                     | 2 0 0 2 1 0 0 1 0 2                                                                                                                                           | | Distribution accordingto 1 4 2 2 3 2 4 4 4 3                                                                                                                         | 29 4 7 6 11 9 10 5 8 43                                                                                                                                       | | 0 995 998 998 997 498 995 NB 996 NB 996 496 968                                                                                                                      | 996 993 NB 991 988 991 NB 990 NB 994 992 955                                                                                                                  | | Treatment DMSO 1% Cyp 100/xg/ml Cyp 200/xg/ml Del 100/zg/ml Del 200/xg/ml Fep 25/zg/ml Fep 50/~g/ml Fev 50 ~g/ml Fev 100/~g/ml Per 50/~g/ml Per 100 ~g/ml MMC 0.6/xM | DMSO 1% Cyp 100/xg/ml Cyp 200 tzg/ml Del 100/xg/ml Del 200/xg/ml Fep 25 p~g/ml Fep 50 ~g/ml Fev 50/xg/ml Fev 100/zg/ml Per 50 p.g/ml Per 100/zg/ml MMC 0.6tzM | | Donor A                                                                                                                                                              | D                                                                                                                                                             |
 Legend:  see  Table 1  (NB, not  enough  binucleated cells).
 Table 8 Correlation coefficients and probabilities of dose-cytotoxic effect  relationships with different indexes cultures treated with  five  pyrethroid insecticides obtained  in whole blood
 | Pyrethroid   | Donor   | Higher dose tested   | Higher dose tested   | BN     | BN     | NDI    | NDI    | CBPI   | CBPI   | |--------------|---------|----------------------|----------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------| | Pyrethroid   | Donor   | /zg/ml               | viability            | r      | P      | r      | P      | r      | P      | | Cyp          | A       | 200                  | V                    | -0.91  | 0.0110 | -0.96  | 0.0026 | -0.97  | 0.0013 | | Cyp          | B       | 200                  | V                    | - 0.88 | 0.0195 | -0.95  | 0.0033 | -0.96  | 0.0019 | | Cyp          | C       | 200                  | T                    | -0.82  | 0.0924 | -0.99  | 0.0008 | -0.99  | 0.0007 | | Del          | A       | 200                  | V                    | -0.88  | 0.0197 | -0.89  | 0.0177 | - 0.90 | 0.0159 | | Del          | B       | 200                  | V                    | -0.85  | 0.0314 | -0.95  | 0.0038 | - 0.96 | 0.0022 | | Del          | C       | 200                  | T                    | -0.95  | 0.0043 | -0.96  | 0.0028 | - 0.96 | 0.0023 | | Fep          | A       | 100                  | T                    | + 0.45 | 0.4456 | - 0.87 | 0.0537 | -0.87  | 0.0562 | | Fep          | B       | 100                  | T                    | - 0.02 | 0.9689 | - 0.96 | 0.0086 | -0.95  | 0.0136 | | Fep          | C       | 100                  | T                    | - 0.63 | 0.2562 | - 0.97 | 0.0025 | -0.98  | 0.0030 | | Fev          | A       | 100                  | V                    | - 0.77 | 0.1244 | - 0.92 | 0.0097 | -0.97  | 0.0057 | | Fev          | B       | 100                  | T                    | - 0.67 | 0.3316 | - 0.88 | 0.1236 | -0.87  | 0.1269 | | Fev          | C       | 100                  | V                    | + 0.02 | 0.9756 | - 0.89 | 0.0435 | -0.90  | 0.0363 | | Per          | A       | 200                  | T                    | - 0.84 | 0.1578 | -0.98  | 0.0220 | -0.98  | 0.0211 | | Per          | B       | 200                  | T                    | -0.54  | 0.4588 | -0.89  | 0.1098 | -0.88  | 0.1249 | | Per          | C       | 100                  | V                    | -0.90  | 0.0394 | - 0.88 | 0.0474 | -0.94  | 0.0182 |
 V, viable  culture; T, not viable  culture (toxic); % BN,  percentage  of BN  cells; NDI,  nuclear  division index;  CBPI,  cytokinesis blocked  proliferation index;  r,  correlation coeficient; P, probability (t-test).
 Chinese  hamster  ovary  (CHO)  ceils; Del and Fev also  produced  sister-chromatid exchanges  (SCE) in CHO cells  .
 In rodents  in  vivo,  Cyp, Del, and Fev were reported  to induce  CA  in mouse  bone marrow ceils  ,  while  one study  on Del yielded negative results in  the  same cell system  .  Fev caused  CA  also  in  rat bone marrow   and  MN in polychromatic  erythrocytes of mice  (Pati  and Bhunya,  4989).  Two  studies on Cyp found  induction  of  MN in  mice ,  although  a negative report  has also  been published .  Both positive and negative findings were likewise obtained  in  the  mouse MN test for  Del . Per weakly induced  MN in  mice .  From  the  available published  data,  it appears  that the  genotoxicity of  these  pyrethroids seems not  to  be modulated  by animal  metabolic activation.
 With reference to  carcinogenesis studies, Del and Fev were not  carcinogenic in  mice and rats , whereas Fev showed  a weak  positivity in mice hepatocytes .
 The  findings of the present  study  using  the CBMN assay  in human  lymphocytes  appear to suggest that  pyrethroid insecticides have a weak (cypermethrin, deltamethrin and fenpropathrin) or nule (fenvalerate and permethrin) genotoxic potential in  vitro. The  slight MN induction observed  for  Del in WB and IL cultures of one donor  appears  to  support the  weak in  vitro genotoxicity of  Del,  earlier suggested by modest SCE induction in human  lymphocytes  .  Fep and Cyp  seemed to  resemble  Del in their ability to  weakly induce  MN.  Fep has not previously tested  in cytogenetic assays  in  vitro, while  Cyp was earlier found  to  be negative in  the SCE  and CA  test in  human lymphocytes .  The  present  findings disagree  with previous results also  for  Fev which  was not  able to  significantly increase MN,  despite the  former positive results obtained using 24 h shorter treatment time  and 3 /~g/ml  Cyt-B    as  well  as  the  induction of  SCE, CA  and C-mitotic figures found  in  cultured human  lymphocytes . The relatively clear MN induction described by Barrueco  et al., 1992 for  Per using  3 /xg/ml Cyt-B  could not  fully be  confirmed in  the  present study  either, as a slight increase in MN was obtained in  a single concentration of  Per  in  WB cultures of  one  donor  only, using 6/xg/ml  Cyt-B. Per  was earlier also  shown to  produce  CA  and, marginally, SCE in  human lymphocytes . However,  taking into  account that weak genotoxicity is  difficult todemonstrate, especially if  it occurs  within a narrow  and toxic concentration range,  the results obtained  with Cyp,  Del  and  Fep  are  not  necessarily in  desagreement with  those  already published in  the  literature.
 Several variables can  affect the  reproducibility and the  sensitivity of  the  in  vitro CBMN assay, including methodology, interindividual variability and the  source, chemical composition and purity of  the  compound to  be tested. The methodological  aspects mainly  include Cyt-B concentration, the  presence  or absence  of  erythrocytes in the lymphocyte  culture and treatment schedule. In recent collaborative studies  we  have demonstrated  that  the CBMN assay  is  reproducible and reliable when  model genotoxins are  tested using  6 ~g/ml Cyt-B and the  methodology applied in  the  present study. We showed that the  use  of  an inefficient Cyt-B  concentration (3  ~ g / m l   Cyt-B) could  lead to  overestimation of  genetic damage possibly due to  the inclusion in  the  scoring of  incompletely blocked binucleated cells that have  divided twice  in  vitro. However, bearing in  mind that both  Cyt-B concentrations (3 and 6 tzg/ml) yielded similar resuits in  the  present study, the  possible overestimation of MN by Surrall6s et al.    and Barrueco  et  al.   does  not  seem  probable.
 On  the  other hand,  the  possible effect of  ery-
 throcytes can  be also  excluded  since both  whole blood  and  isolated lymphocyte cultures have  been performed. Our results uggest that the  presumption of  Van Hummelen  and  Kirsch-Volders  and Elhajouji et  al.  on the  superior sensitivity of  IL  cultures cannot  be generalized. With reference to  treatment schedule, Fev was added 24 h earlier in the  present  study  than  in our previous  positive experiments  . Barrueco  et  al.   added  Per  at 48 h in  their CA  studies and 24 h (like in  the present study) for  MN experiments. Taking  into account  that Fev and Per mainly  induced  chromosome-type  aberrations and  were  considered to act  in  a  time-dependent but  S-phase  independent way , the  treatment schedule  used  in the  present study should be  as  sensitive in  detecting  a possible genotoxicity of  such  chemicals as those  described by Surrall6s et al.    and Barrueco  et  al. .
 Besides  interindividual variability, which  could not  be  controlled with  the  number of  donors  used in the  present  study, other  important variables that could  explain the  differences found  between the present  and  earlier studies  could be  the source, isomer  composition, or purity of  the  insecticides used.  It  is  important to  point out  that the  purity of  Fev but  not  Per  was higher in  the present study  than  in  the  previous experiments. The pyrethroids used  in  the  present study  were obtained  from Dr. Ehrenstorfer GmbH (Augsburg,  Germany) whereas  in  the  previous studies, Per was  obtained  from Chem.  Service,  (West Chester, PA) and  Fev  from  S.P.E. Shell (Madrid, Spain).
 Cell  cycle  progression can be delayed  as a consequence  of  cellular toxicity due to in  vitro treatments. In  order to  control lymphocyte proliferation, the  percentage of  BN  cells   and,  more recently, nuclear division  index   have  been  used.  The need of  including not  only binucleated ceils  but also  multinucleated cells was  also  pointed  out by Van  Hummelen and Kirsch-Volders   who  used the  percentage of  multinucleated cells as  an  indication of  toxicity or  cell cycle  delay. The NDI  reflects the  average
 number of  nuclei per  cell but  is  an indirect indication  of  cell cycle  delay  since  it  considers trinucleated cells separately from tetranucleated cells. We propose the cytokinesis block proliferation index  (CBPI) in  which both trinucleated and tetranucleated cells  are supposed to be  in their third cell cycle. This  is  acceptable if it  is  assumed that  trinucleated and tetranucleated cells derive from binucleated  ceils  undergoing one  further mitosis  after  a  multipolar  (triand  tetrapolar respectively) anaphase, as Schultz and  0nfelt   have recently shown  by video  time-lapse recording.  Thus,  CBPI indicates  the  average number of  cell cycles the  sampled  cells have  gone through,  and can be considered  as cell  kinetic index  or average  lymphocytic division index  with some  similarities to the proliferation rate  index (PRI)  used  for  metaphase  in  cultures treated with BrdU.
 Although  we found  no quantitative differences in measuring  cell  cycle  delay  between NDI  and CBPI, CBPI  can be considered biologically more relevant in  measuring  cell cycle  delay. Our results show that  CBPI  and NDI  are  more effective in measuring cell  cycle  progression than the percentage  of  BN  cells which is  not  always  reduced by toxic  treatments, because a decrease  in the number of  multinucleated cells may not  affect or may even increase the  percentage of  BN  ceils.
 According  to  our  data, Fep appeared  to  be the most toxic  pyrethroid tested, as 100 ~g/ml  resuited  in a 100%  toxicity in all  donors studied. On  the  other  hand,  Cyp and Del caused  a similar reduction  of cell  proliferation, and both pesticides  were less toxic  than  Fev,  which is  opposite to  what was found in  our  previous study  .  Per appeared  to  be as  toxic as  Fev.  A relationship between the presence  of the cyano group and  toxicity to mammals has been proposed,  but the only  pyrethroid tested without  a cyano  group  (Per) did  not  produce  higher  toxicity in cultured  human  lymphocytes  when  compared with the others. Therefore, the toxicity of these pyrethroids in  vitro seems to  be more related to the presence of methyl groups in the cyclopropane  ring  (see  Fig.  1).
 In conclusion, the five  pyrethroids tested, except  Fev,  only  weakly  increased the  frequency of
 MN.  Nevertheless, as weak  genotoxicity is  difficult  to demonstrate, more  studies  using  an extended number  of donors and different culture schedules as  well  as  different source, isomer  composition  and  purity  of the pesticides, are required.  A  clear  linear dose-dependent  cytotoxic effect was found  with  all of  the  pesticides tested; this  linearity could be  accurately measured by means of  the  newly introduced cytokinesis block proliferation index.
 ## Acknowledgements
 We  would  like  to thank Glbria  Umbert  and M~rida  McCarthy  for their  excellent technical and secretarial help,  respectively. This  investigation  was supported  in  part  by the  Spanish  Ministry of  Education  and Science    and the  European Communities (STEP 910161). The  Spanish Ministry  of Education and Science  is  also  acknowledged  for  supporting Jordi Surrall6s as a FPI fellow  during  his  stay  at  the Laboratory of  Molecular  and Cellular Toxicology, Department of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology, Finnish Institute of Occupational  Health, Helsinki, Finland.
 ## References
 Aldridge, W,N.  An  assessment of  the  toxicological properties of  pyrethroids and their neurotoxicity, Crit. Rev.  Toxicol., 21,  89-104.
 Amer, S.H. and  E.I. Aboul-ela  Cytogenetic effects of pesticides. III. Induction of  micronuclei n  mouse  bone marrow by the  insecticides cypermethrin and rotetone, Mutation Res., 155, 135-142.
 Barrueco, C., A.  Herrera, C.  Caballo and  E.  de  la Pefia  Cytogenetic effects of  permethrin in  cultured human lymphocytes, Mutagenesis, 7,  433-437.
 Barrueco, C., A.  Herrera, C.  Caballo and  E.  de  la Pefia  The induction of  structural chromosome aberrations in human lymphocyte cultures and  CHO  cells by  permethrin. Teratog. Carcinog. Mutagen,  14,  31-38.
 Batiste-Alentorn, M., N. Xamena,  A. Vel~izquez, A. Creus and  R.  Marcos   Mutagenicity testing of the pyrethroid insecticide cypermethrain in  Drosophila, Mutagenesis, 1,343-346.
 Batiste-Alentom, M.,  Xamena,  N.,  Velfizquez, A.,  Creus, A.,
 - and R. Marcos   Non-mutagenicity of  fenvalerate in Drosophila, Mutagenesis, 2,  7-10.
- Bhunya, S.P. and P.C. Pati    Genotoxic  effects of a synthetic pyrethroid insecticide cypermethrin in mice in vivo, Toxicol.  Lett., 41,  223-230.
- Bhunya, S.P.  and P.C.  Pati    Effect of  deltamethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid, on  the induction of chromosome aberrations, micronuclei and sperm abnormalities in  mice. Mutagenesis, 5,  229-232.
- Brooks,  T.M.   Toxicity studies with  WL 43467 in  the host  mediated  assay  and in  microorganisms in  vitro. Unpublished report from Shell  Research  Ltd .
- Caballo, G.C.   Estudio  genot6xico de los  insecticidas piretroides permetrln, deltametrln y fenvalerato usando cultivos in  vitro de c61ulas  de ovario  de hamster  chino. Doctoral Thesis, Facultad de Ciencias Biol6gicas, Universidad  Complutense  de Madrid.
- Caballo, G.C.,  A. Herrera, C. Barrueco, A. Santa-Maria, F. Sanz and E. de la  Pefia    Analysis  of cytogenetic damage induced  in  CHO cells by the  pyrethroid insecticide  fenvalerate, Teratogenesis. Carcinogen. Mutagen, 12, 243-249.
- Cabral, J.R.P., D. Galendo,  M. Laval  and N. Lyandrat   Carcinogenicity studies with  deltamethrin in  mice  and  rats, Cancer  Lett., 49,  147-152.
- Cabral, J.R.P. and  D. Galendo   Carcinogenicity study of the  pesticide fenvalerate in  mice,  Cancer  Lett., 49,  13-18.
- Carbonell, E.,  M. Puig,  N. Xamena, A. Creus  and R. Marcos   Mitotic  arrest induced by fenvalerate in human lymphocyte  cultures, Toxicol. Lett., 48,  45-48.
- Chatterjee, K.K., G. Talukder, A. Sharma   Effects of synthetic pyrethroid on mammalian chromosomes.  I.  Sumicidin. Mutation  Res.,  105,  101-106.
- Chauhan,  L.K.S., T.S.S.  Dikshith and  V.  Sundoraraman   Effect of  deltamethrin in  plant cells. I.  Cytological effects on roots  meristem  of Alliurn  cepa, Mutation  Res.,  171, 25-30.
- Dolara,  P.,  M.  Salvadori, T. Capobianco and F. Torricelli   Sister-chromatid exchanges  in  human  lymphocytes induced  by dimethoate, omethoate,  deltamethrin, benomyl,  and  their mixture, Mutation  Res., 283,  113-118.
- Eastmond, D.A.  and J.D. Tucker  Identification of aneuploidy-inducing agents  using  cytokinesis blocked  human  lymphocytes  and an antikinetochore antibody, Environ.  Mol. Mutagen,  13,  34-43.
- Elhajouji, A., A.P. Santos,  P. van Hummelen,  M.  KirschVoiders    Metabolic differences between  whole  blood and isolated lymphocyte  cultures for  micronucleus induction, 23th  EEMS Annual Meeting, Abstracts Book, 226.
- Fenech,  M.    The  cytokinesis block  micronuclei technique: a detailed description of  the  method and its application to  genotoxicity studies in  human population, Mutation  Res., 285,  35-44.
- Fenech,  M. and A. Morley    Measurement of  micronuclei in  lymphocytes, Mutation  Res.,  147,  29-36.
- Flodstrom, S.,  L.  Warngard,  S.  Ljungquist and U.G. Ahlborg -   Inhibition of metabolic  cooperation in  vitro  and enhancement  of  enzyme altered foci  incidence in  rat  liver by the  pyrethroid insecticide fenvalerate, Arch.  Toxicol., 61,218-223.
- Gupta, R.K., Z.A. Mehr, D.W.  Korte and L.C. Ruledge   Mutagenic  potential of permethrin in Drosophila melanogaster (Diptera: Drosophilidae) sex  linked recessive lethal test, J.  Econ.  Entomol., 83,  721-724.
- Hoellinger, H.,  A. Lecorsier, M. Sonnier, C. Leger,  Do-CaoThang  and Nguyen-Hoang-Nam    Cytotoxicity, cytogenotoxicity and allergenicity test on certain pyrethroids. Drugs Chemical  Toxicol., 10,  229-310.
- IARC    IARC  monograph on the  evaluation of  carcinogenic  risks to  humans.  Vol.  53:  Occupational exposures in insecticide application, and  some pesticides. Lyon,  France.
- International Congress  of  Pesticide Chemistry (IUPAC)  IX, Pyrethroid insecticides: biological activity, mode  of action, metabolism  and toxicology, Kyoto,  Japan.
- Kastenbaum, M.A.  and  K.O.  Bowman ,  Tables for determining the statistical significance of mutation  frequencies, Mutation  Res., 9,  527-549.
- Kavlock,  R.,  N. Chernoff, R. Baron,  E. Linder, B. Carver, J. Dilley  and V. Simmon    Toxicity  studies with decamethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid insecticide, J.  Environ. Pathol. Toxicol., 2,  751-765.
- Lewis,  M. and A. Woodburn    Pyrethroids. Agrochemical  Monitor  (Wood, Mackenzie  and Co.)  33,  2-12.
- Lindholm,  C.,  H. Norppa, M.  Hayashi  and M.  Sorsa   Induction  of micronuclei and  anaphasc aberrations by cytochalasin-B in human  lymphocyte  cultures, Mutation Res.,  260,  369-375.
- Littlefield, L.G.,  A.M. Sayer  and  E.L.  Frome   Comparison of dose-response parameters  for rediation-induced acentric fragments and micronuclei observed  in  cytokinesis-arrested lymphocytes, Mutagenesis, 4,  265-270.
- Migliore, L.,  M. Nieri, S.  Amodio and  N. Lopriano   The human  lymphocyte  micronucleus assay:  a comparison  between whole-blood and  separated-lymphocyte cultures, Mutation  Res., 227,  167-172.
- Miyamoto, J.    Degradation, metabolism  and toxicity of synthetic pyrcthroid. Environ. Health  Perspect., 14,  15-28.
- Moriya,  M.,  T.  Ohta,  K.  Watanabe,  T.  Miyazawa,  K. Kato  and Y. Shirasu   Further mutagenicity studies and pesticides  in  bacterial reversion assay  systems, Mutation  Res., 116,  185-215.
- Papadopoulou-Mourkidou,  E.   Analysis of established pyrethroid insecticides, Residue  Rev.,  89,  179-208.
- Pardo,  G.A., R.G. Nerhing,  A. Creus,  R. Marcos and N. Xamena    Study  of  the  possible genotoxic activity of three  pyrethroid insecticides (deltamethrin, fenpropathrin and permethin) in Drosophila  melanogaster, 23th  EEMS Annual Meeting, Abstracts Book, 214.
- Parker,  C.M., D.R. Patterson and G.A. Van  Gelder   Chronic  toxicity and  carcinogenicity evaluation of  fenvalerate  in  rats, J.  Toxicol.  Environ. Health, 13,  83-97.
- Parker,  C.M., C.B. McCullough, J.B.M. Gellatly and C.D. Johnston    Toxicologic and carcinogenic evaluation
 - of  fenvalerate in  the  B6C3F1  mouse,  Fundam. Appl.  Toxicol., 3,  114-120.
- Pati,  P.C. and  S.P. Bhunya    C~togenetic  effects of fenvalerate in  mammalians in  vivo  test system,  Mutation Res., 222,  149-154.
- Pluijmen, M., C. Devron, R. Montesano,  C. Malaveille, A. Hautefeuille and H. Bartsch   Lack of  mutagenicity of  synthetic pyrethroids in Salmonella typhimurium strains and  V79 Chinese  hamster cells, Mutation  Res., 137,  7-15.
- Polakov~,  H. and M. Vargov~    Evaluation of  the  mutagenic  effects of  decamethrin: cytogenetic analysis of  bone marrow,  Mutation  Res., 120,  167-171.
- Puig,  M.,  E.  Carbonell, N. Xamena, A. Creus  and R. Marcos  Analysis of  cytogenetic damage induced  in  cultured human  lymphocytes  by the  pyrethroid insecticides cypermethrin  and fenvalerate, Mutagenesis, 4,  72-74.
- Schultz, N. and A. t~nfelt ,  Video time-lapse study  of mitosis in  binucleated V79 cells: chromosome segregation and cleavage, Mutagenesis, 9,  117-123.
- Surrall6s, J., E.  Carbonell, M. Puig, N. Xamena, A. Creus  and R. Marcos   Induction of  mitotic micronuclei by the pyrethroid insecticide fenvalerate in  cultured human lymphocytes, Toxicol. Lett., 54,  151-155.
- Surrall6s, J., E.  Carbonell, R. Marcos,  F.  Degrassi, A. Antoc- - cia  and C.  Tanzarella   A  collaborative study  on the improvement  of  the  micronucleus test in  cultured human lymphocytes, Mutagenesis, 7,  407-410.
- Surrall6s, J., A. Antoccia, A. Creus,  F.  Degrassi, F.  Peris, C. Tanzarella, N. Xamena, R. Marcos   The effect of cytochalasin-B concentration on the  frequency of  micronuclei induced  by  four  standard mutagens.  Results from  two laboratories, Mutagenesis, 9,  347-353.
- Suzuki, H.   Studies  on  the mutagenicity of some pyrethroids on Salmonella strains in  the  presence of  mouse hepatic $9 fraction. Unpublished  report from Sumitomo Co. (JMPR, 179,  p.  168).
- Van Hummelen, P.  and  M. Kirsch-Volders   Analysis of eigth known or  suspected aneugens  by  the  in  vitro human lymphocyte  micronucleus test, Mutagenesis, 7,  447-455.
- Vijverberg, H.P.M. and J.  van  tier Bercken    Neurotoxicological effect and the mode  of acction  of pyrethroid insecticides, Crit. Rev.  Toxicol., 21,  105-126.
- Woodruff,  R.C.,  J.P. Phillips and  D. Irwin   Pesticide-induced complete  and partial chromosome  loss  in  screens repair-defective females of Drosophila  melanogaster, Environ.  Mutagen., 5,  835-846.
- Zerba,  E.    Insecticidal ctivity of  pyrethroids on insects of  medical  importance, Parasitol. Today,  4,  53-57.