
 GLYPH&lt;c=11,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=12,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
 ## Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pest
 ## Autophagy perturbation upon acute pyrethroid treatment impacts adipogenic commitment of mesenchymal stem cells
 
 Julee Verma a,b , Ajit Kumar Rai a,b , Neeraj Kumar Satija a,b,*
 
 
 - a Systems Toxicology Group, Food, Drug &amp; Chemical, Environment and Systems Toxicology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Vishvigyan Bhawan,
 31, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, India
 b Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India
 ## A R T I C L E  I N F O
 Keywords: Mesenchymal stem cells Adipogenesis Cypermethrin Permethrin Autophagy
 ## 1. Introduction
 Obesity and weight gain have emerged as one of the most concerning human health problems in recent times. The global prevalence of obesity has risen nearly three times since 1975 according to the World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obe sity-and-overweight).  Evidence  suggests  a  link  between  obesity  and adipogenesis, the process of differentiation of mesenchymal stem cell (MSCs)  into  mature  adipocytes  . Recently  the  involvement  of  autophagy,  a  catabolic  process  for  the breakdown of bulk cytoplasmic contents and subcellular organelles, has been  investigated  in  adipogenesis  .
 ## A B S T R A C T
 Environmental chemical exposure can cause dysregulation in adipogenesis that can result in  metabolic syndrome, which includes insulin  resistance,  type  2  diabetes,  cardiovascular  disease,  as  well  as  excessive  body weight. The role of autophagy in adipocyte differentiation is debatable since both positive and negative effects have  been  reported.  Type-I  and  type-II  synthetic  pyrethroids α -cypermethrin  (CPM)  and  permethrin  (PER), respectively,  are  reported to  increase  adipogenesis in  vitro and in  vivo. However, it is not known how these pyrethroids affect mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Thus, this study focused on evaluating the effect of pyrethroids  (CPM  and  PER)  pre-treatment  (24  h)  on  MSC  commitment  and  the  regulatory  role  of  autophagy  in adipogenic lineage commitment. The formation of adipocytes was observed through nile red staining, perilipin expression by immunoflourescence, and adipogenic markers PPAR γ , C/EBP α , and FABP4 by western blotting. It was found that the adipogenic differentiation ability of MSCs was significantly increased upon CPM or PER pretreatment at 100 µ M concentration as evident by lipid accumulation and enhanced expression of adipogenic markers. To assess the involvement of autophagy, the expression of p62 and LC3II were evaluated following pretreatment. Immunoblotting results revealed an increased expression of p62 and LC3II in CPM or PER pretreated MSCs suggesting CPM and PER mediated inhibition of autophagy at 24 h. Further, an increase was observed in adipogenesis upon CPM or PER pre-treatment in combination with chloroquine, while use of rapamycin during pre-treatment abrogated the effect of CPM and PER. Thus, this study concludes that CPM or PER pre-treatment increases  the  adipogenic  differentiation  of  MSCs.  Since  chloroquine  also  demonstrated  similar  adipogenic response, it further highlights that 24 h pre-treatment with autophagy modulators to inhibit basal autophagy primes MSCs towards adipogenic lineage.
 Adipogenesis and obesity have been functionally related to autophagy. Obese  individuals  and  animals  show  enhanced  autophagy  and  autophagic flux in adipose tissues . Several reports also suggest that elevated level of autophagy promoted MSC differentiation towards adipogenesis . However, suppression of adipogenic conversion was also observed with increased autophagy . A study demonstrated that MSCs have a sensitive phenotype, with amassed autophagosomes, which are on the verge of autophagic  breakdown.  The  autophagy  balance,  thus,  appears  to  be crucial  for  MSC  differentiation  and  function  . These  fascinating  findings  highlight  the  functional  significance  of
 * Corresponding author at: Systems Toxicology Group, Food, Drug &amp; Chemical, Environment and Systems Toxicology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Vishvigyan Bhawan, 31, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226 001, India.
 E-mail address: neerajsatija@iitr.res.in (N.K. Satija).
 $XJXVW GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=21,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=22,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;
 $OO ULJKWV UHVHUYHGGLYPH&lt;c=17,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;
 GLYPH&lt;c=20,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=19,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=24,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;GLYPH&lt;c=25,font=/JSEQYP+TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT&gt;
 
 
 autophagy in adipogenesis.
 Apart  from  autophagy,  the  tremendous  rise  in  overweight  and obesity rates around the globe has moved attention to other potential environmental contributors as well, like pesticides. Studies have also established  the  connection  of  pesticide  exposure  with  higher  risk  of obesity, including pyrethroids . Permethrin (a type-I pyrethroid) and α -cypermethrin (a type-II pyrethroid) have structural similarities to natural pyrethrins, and represent the two classes of pyrethroids (Suppl. Fig. 1). Due to their widespread use in agriculture and domestic pest control, exposure of humans is highly likely. Occupational exposure to farmers and industrial workers has led to blood serum concentrations upto 32 µ g/ml (~77 µ M) of CPM . CPM and its metabolite, 3-phenoxybenzoic acid,  have  also  been  detected  in  blood  and  urine,  respectively,  of humans . Both pyrethroids have been recently reported to increase preadipocyte 3T3-L1 differentiation towards adipocytes . In addition, permethrin and deltamethrin have also been shown to cause fat accumulation in mice and C.  elegans ,  respectively  . Studies have also reported the role of oxidative stress in  pyrethroid  mediated  toxicity  . This is important as oxidative stress results in increased adipogenic differentiation of MSCs  and also modulates autophagy .
 Most of the studies have focused on evaluating the effect of pyrethroid exposure on adipocyte differentiation using the well-established 3T3-L1  cell  line.  However,  3T3-L1  is  a  type  of  committed  preadipocyte  that  has  lost  its  stem  cell  properties,  and  undergo  postconfluent mitotic expansion unlike primary adipogenic precursor cells . None of the reported studies reflect upon whether short-term exposure to pyrethroids impacts MSC differentiation potential. Since MSCs are the precursors of preadipocytes, it is worthwhile looking at if cells are affected before becoming committed to adipogenic lineage. Hence, this study was undertaken to assess how acute CPM and PER pre-treatment of MSCs affects their adipogenic commitment, and does autophagy play any role.
 ## 2. Materials and methods
 ## 2.1. Chemicals/Reagents
 Cypermethrin  ( α -cypermethrin)  (36,128,  CAS  No.  52315 -07-8), (molecular  formula  C22H19Cl2NO3; &gt; 90%  purity)  and  Permethrin (45,614, CAS No. 52645 -53-1) (molecular formula C21H20Cl2O3; &gt; 90% purity) were procured from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). ProLong ™ Diamond Antifade  Mountant  (P36970)  mounting  media  was  purchased  from ThermoFisher  Scientific  (USA).  Minimum  Essential  Medium  alpha ( α -MEM)  ,  Fetal  Bovine  Serum  (FBS)  (10270 -106)  and Antibiotic-  antimycotic  solution  (100 × )  (15240062)  were  purchased from  Gibco  (USA).  3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (475989), dexamethasone (D4902), 3-Isobutyl-1methylxanthine  (IBMX)  (I5879),  Indomethacin  (I7378),  Insulin  solution Human (I9278), Bovine Serum Albumin (A3608), Sodium bicarbonate  (S5761),  Ethylenediaminetatraacetic  acid  (EDTA)  (E6758), Neutral Red (N4638), 4 ′ ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (D9542), Trypsin (T4799) and Chloroquine diphosphate salt (C6628) were purchased  from  Sigma-Aldrich  (USA).  Western  Chemiluminescent  HRP Substrate (1705062) was purchased from Bio-Rad (USA). Rapamycin (sc-3504) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (USA). Triton X-100 (64518) was purchased from Sisco Research Laboratories (SRL) (India).  Primary  antibodies  rabbit  anti-PPAR γ (2435S),  rabbit  antiCEBP α (8178S),  rabbit  anti-FABP4  (3544S),  rabbit  anti-perilipin-1 (9349S)  and  secondary  antibodies  horse  anti-mouse  IgG  (7076P2), goat  anti-rabbit  IgG  (7074P2)  were  procured  from  Cell  Signaling Technology (USA). Mouse Anti-SQSTM1/p62 (ab56416) and Goat Anti- rabbit IgG H &amp; L (Alexa Fluor ® 488) (ab150077) were purchased from abcam  (USA).  Rabbit  anti-LC3  antibody  (L8918)  was  obtained  from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Mouse antiβ -Actin (MA5 -15739) was purchased from Thermo Scientific (USA).
 ## 2.2. Primary culture of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
 Adult male and female BALB/c mice (8 -10 weeks) were obtained from animal breeding colony of CSIR-IITR. Mice were fed with pellet diet  and  water ad  libitum and  maintained  under  controlled  standard temperature and humidity environment. The study was approved by the Institutional  Animal  Ethics  committee    and  animals  were  handled  during  the  experiment  according to the guidelines of the Committee for the Purpose of Control and  Supervision  of  Experiments  on  Animals  (CPCSEA),  Ministry  of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Government of India. Mouse was euthanized using a single high dose of Ketamine (100 mg/kg b.wt.) and xylazine (2 mg/kg b.wt.) intraperitoneally. Skin was cleaned by 70% ethanol, followed by fur and skin removal. Incisions were made around the connection between hind limbs and trunk. The leg was detached from the joint and washed with 70% ethanol then immersed in ice cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Inside the laminar hood the muscles,  ligaments,  and  tendons  were  removed  and  the  bones  were transferred into PBS containing antibiotics. Tibia and femur bones were separated from the joint using dissecting scissors and surgical scalpel and cells were flushed out from the bone cavities with α -MEM medium using  needle  until  the  bones  become  pale.  The  cell  suspension  was centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min and the pellet was resuspended in fresh complete α -MEM  Medium,  supplemented  with  20%  FBS  and  1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution (100 × ). Cells were plated in two 25 cm 2 cell culture flasks (Corning, USA) and were incubated in CO2 incubator (5% CO2) at 37 ◦ C . Medium was replaced with fresh complete α -MEM medium after 24 h to remove unattached cells. Cells were passaged after 4 -6 days using 0.25% trysin-EDTA. MSCs were characterized and used in further experiments after five passages to ensure using pure population of MSCs for experiments.
 ## 2.3. MTT assay
 MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) is a colorimetric assay which is used to detect the metabolic state and survival of cells. MSCs were plated in 96-well plate (5000 cells/well) and treated with various concentrations of CPM and PER (1, 10 and 100 µ M). After 24 h treatment, MTT (0.5 mg/ml in PBS) was added to each well containing treatment media and incubated for 2 h in dark at 37 ◦ C. Formation of purple coloured insoluble formazan crystals was observed under the microscope after 2 h. Once the crystals were formed, media was removed and cells were washed once with PBS. 100 µ l DMSO was added to dissolve formazan crystals. Colorimetric absorbance was taken at 570 nm and 630 nm using spectrophotometer (Biotek PowerWave XS Microplate Reader, USA).
 ## 2.4. Neutral red uptake (NRU) assay
 Neutral red is a cationic dye which has a net charge close to zero. This dye accumulates in lysosomes and becomes charged which makes it unable to leave lysosome. If cell dies or lysosomal proton gradient is disturbed neutral red cannot stay inside the lysosome and freely passes out. For neutral red assay, cells were seeded into 96-well plates (5000 cells/well) and treated with different concentrations of CPM and PER (1, 10 and 100 µ M) for 24 h. Media was replaced with neutral red containing  media  after  24  h  and  incubated  for  2  h  at  37 ◦ C.  Cells  were washed with PBS followed by dye extraction from each well using 100 µ l neutral red destain solution (50% ethanol, 49% deionized water and 1% glacial  acetic  acid)  per  well.  Absorbance  was  read  at  540  nm  using spectrophotometer (Biotek PowerWave XS Microplate Reader, USA).
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;DGLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;G
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;
 ## 2.5. Differentiation assay
 MSCs were plated in 96-well plate with 5000 cells/well. Post confluency, cells were treated with different doses of CPM and PER (1, 10 and 100 µ M) for 24 h. For adipogenic differentiation, treatment media was replaced with differentiation media after 24 h without washing the cells. Cells were then cultured for one to two weeks in adipogenic differentiation medium (complete α -MEM media supplemented with 1 µ M dexamethasone,  0.5 µ M  3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine,  50 µ M  indomethacin and 1 µ g/ml Insulin) with medium changed every alternate day. Cells were also treated with chloroquine (CQ) (10 µ M) and rapamycin (200 nM) alone and in combination with PER and CPM for 24 h.
 ## 2.6. Nile red staining
 Nile  red  staining  is  used  to  stain  intracellular  lipid  droplets.  To analyze the lipid droplets in adipocytes, wells were washed with PBS and fixed with 4% PFA for 15 min at room temperature. After fixation, cells were washed twice with PBS, followed by incubation in DAPI (0.5 µ g/ml) - nile red stain (200 ng/ml). The plate was incubated in dark for 5 min at room temperature. Cells were washed with PBS and images were  captured.  Five  microscopic  fields  per  well  for  each  individual experimental  group  ( n = 3  in  triplicate)  were  captured  using  Nikon ECLIPSE Ti -S inverted microscope (Nikon, Japan). Image processing and quantification was done using particle analysing tool of Image J (NIH, USA). Nuclei count was similar for all treatment groups and signals of nile red were normalized to the number of nuclei during analysis. A representative image is represented in the results. Details of image quantification and nuclei count are given in supplementary information (Suppl. Fig. 2A, B, 3A, B).
 ## 2.7. Western blotting
 For western blotting, cells were washed with PBS followed by direct lysis of cells with hot laemmli buffer, and denatured at 95 ◦ C for 5 min. Proteins  were  separated  by  SDS-PAGE,  and  transferred  onto  PVDF membrane using wet transfer. Membranes were blocked in 3% BSA in Tris-buffered  saline-Tween  20  (TBST)  and  thereafter,  incubated  with primary  antibody  for  p62  (1:1000),  LC3  ,  PPAR γ (1:1000), CEBP α (1:1000)  and  FABP4    overnight  at  4 ◦ C.  Blots  were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (anti-mouse IgG 1:10000, and anti-rabbit IgG 1:5000) for 1 h at room temperature. Bands were developed using chemiluminescent HRP substrate,  and  image  was  captured  through  Amersham  Imager  600  (GE Healthcare  Life  Sciences,  USA).  The  bands  were  quantified  using Quantity  One  software  (Bio-Rad,  USA). β -actin  was  used  as  a  house keeping gene for protein loading control.
 ## 2.8. Perilipin staining
 Perilipin is a protein which coats the lipid droplets in adipocytes. To analyze  perilipin  protein  expression,  cells  grown  on  coverslips  were fixed with 4% PFA for 15 min at room temperature, and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X- 100 + 1% BSA solution. Cells were washed twice with PBS, followed by incubation with rabbit anti-perilipin antibody (1:200) overnight at 4 ◦ C. Secondary goat anti-rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 488  (1:500)  was  used  against  perilipin  antibody.  Cell  nuclei  were stained with DAPI (0.5 µ g/ml). Cells were washed with PBS and images were captured using Nikon ECLIPSE Ti -S inverted microscope, Japan. Image  processing  and  quantification  was  done  using  Image  J  (NIH, USA). Nuclei count was similar in each experimental group. Signal of perilipin was normalized to the number of nuclei while analysing the results. A representative image set is shown in the results. Details of image quantification and nuclei count are given in supplementary information (Suppl. Fig. 2C, D, 3C, D).
 ## 2.9. Statistical analysis
 All  data  are  expressed  as  the  mean ± standard  error  of  mean  of atleast  three  independent  experiments  run  in  duplicate  or  triplicate. Statistical  analysis  of  the  data  was  done  by  using  Prism5  GraphPad software. Comparison between two groups was performed by Student ' s t -test. Comparison between multiple groups was assessed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett ' s (when comparing all the groups to control) or Tukey ' s (when comparing all the groups with each other) multiple comparison test. p &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
 ## 3. Results
 ## 3.1. CPM and PER do not cause cell death
 MSCs cultures established from mouse bone marrow were characterized. The cells expressed Sca-1, had no expression of CD11b (monocytic marker), and differentiated into adipocytes and osteoblasts (data not shown). Using these cells, firstly, the effect of different concentrations (1, 10 and 100 µ M) of CPM and PER on viability was assessed by MTT and NRU assays. Treatment of MSCs for 24 h did not result in any significant loss of cell viability upto 100 µ M concentration of CPM and PER (Fig. 1).
 ## 3.2. CPM and PER pretreatment makes MSCs more vulnerable towards adipogenic differentiation
 Since no cytotoxicity was observed, the impact of 24 h pre-treatment of different concentrations of CPM and PER on adipogenic commitment of MSCs was evaluated. CPM and PER pretreated MSCs were subjected to adipogenic stimulus and differentiation was monitored by staining lipid droplets using nile red stain. Nile red staining showed that acute preexposure of CPM and PER increased the adipogenic differentiation potential  of  MSCs  in  a  dose-dependent  manner  compared  to  control (Fig. 2A, C, E, G). This result was further validated by staining for perilipin  whose  expression  was  found  to  be  increased  with  increase  in concentration of CPM and PER (Fig. 2B, D, F, H). Maximum differentiation was observed at 100 µ M concentration which exhibited highest number of lipid-loaded cells. Thus, 100 µ M concentration of CPM and PER was chosen for further validation and mechanistic studies.
 Adipogenesis is regulated by various transcription factors and proteins. PPAR γ and C/EBP α are regarded as major transcription factors required for adipogenic differentiation as demonstrated through loss-offunction studies in vivo and in vitro . . Study has also reported expression of FABP4 during adipogenesis and its transcriptional regulation by PPAR γ agonists, insulin, fatty acids (FAs)  and  dexamethasone  .  Therefore,  the expression of these markers was assessed through western blotting for evaluating adipogenic differentiation. It was found that the expression of these markers was significantly increased by ~36%, ~46% and ~30% in CPM pretreated cells (Fig. 2J) and ~90%, ~85% and ~43% in PER pretreated cells as compared to control (Fig. 2I). These results suggest that CPM and PER pre-exposure makes MSCs more prone towards adipogenic lineage without significantly affecting the viability of cells. It was also observed that PER pre-treatment causes slightly higher degree of adipogenic differentiation compared to CPM.
 ## 3.3. Autophagy inhibition induced by CPM and PER
 As autophagy is one of the major mechanisms reported to regulate adipogenesis, therefore perturbation of basal autophagy levels in MSCs was assessed upon CPM and PER exposure to evaluate the effect at the stem cell level. MSCs were treated with CPM or PER for 24 h and the levels  of  crucial  autophagic  markers  (LC3II  and  p62)  were  observed through immunoblotting. Western blot data showed significant
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;DGLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;G
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;
 O
 
 accumulation  of  LC3II  as  well  as  p62  upon  CPM  or  PER  treatment compared to control (Fig. 3A, B). This suggested CPM and PER mediated inhibition of autophagy.
 Further, the rate of autophagic clearance, i.e. flux, was assessed using chloroquine  (CQ)  (an  autophagy  inhibitor)  and  rapamycin  (an  autophagy activator). Co-treatment of CPM or PER with CQ significantly upregulated  LC3II  and  p62  levels  compared  to  CPM  or  PER  alone (Fig. 3C, D). However, the levels of LC3II and p62 were significantly decreased in cells treated with CPM or PER in combination with rapamycin (Fig. 3C, D). These results confirmed the inhibition of autophagy in MSCs upon CPM or PER treatment.
 ## 3.4. Inhibition of autophagy enhances adipogenic commitment of MSCs
 To ascertain if inhibition of autophagy before the induction of adipogenic differentiation can result in enhanced adipogenesis, MSCs were pretreated  with  CQ  for  24  h  followed  by  adipogenic  stimulus.  This resulted in significant increase in adipogenesis (lipid droplets) compared to control (Fig. 4A, C, E, G). Combined pretreatment of CPM or PER with CQ resulted in further increase in the number of lipid-loaded cells as compared to CPM or PER alone (Fig. 4A, C, E, G). This increase in adipogenic  differentiation  was  also  confirmed  through  immunofluorescence  staining  for  perilipin  (Fig.  4B,  D,  F,  H).  The  expression  of adipogenic markers PPAR γ , C/EBP α and FABP4 was also significantly increased in CQ treated group compared to control (Fig. 4I, J). These results suggest that reduced level of basal autophagy in mesenchymal stem cells is one of the mechanisms responsible for enhanced adipogenic commitment.
 ## 3.5. Activation of autophagy mitigates CPM and PER effect
 To reconfirm whether CPM and PER mediated autophagy inhibition was responsible for the enhancement of adipogenic differentiation of MSCs, cells were treated with rapamycin for 24 h prior to the induction of adipogenic differentiation. Rapamycin treatment resulted in significant  reduction (~65%) in the number of adipocytes as compared to control (Fig. 4A, C, E, G). Pretreatment with CPM or PER in combination with rapamycin lead to ~36% and ~44% decrease in adipocyte number compared to CPM or PER alone, but an increase in the number of adipocytes compared to rapamycin alone (Fig. 4A, C, E, G). Immunofluorescence staining also showed ~42% and ~54% reduction in perilipin expression upon pretreatment with CPM or PER in combination with rapamycin as compared to CPM or PER alone while an increase in perilipin expression compared to rapamycin alone (70% and 80% in case of CPM and PER, respectively)  (Fig.  4B,  D,  F,  H).  Similar  results  were observed upon western blotting for adipogenic markers (Fig. 4I, J). This reduction in adipogenesis is due to enhanced autophagy as a result of rapamycin co-treatment. This confirms that increased autophagy mitigates CPM and PER effect on lineage commitment towards adipogenesis. Thus, suggesting an antagonist action of pyrethroids and rapamycin.
 ## 4. Discussion
 With ever increasing global burden of metabolic disorders including obesity,  the  significance  of  mesenchymal  stem  cells  as  precursors  of adipocytes cannot be neglected. Literature is replete with studies linking adipogenesis to pyrethroids  . However, the impact of pyrethroids on MSC commitment has not been addressed as most studies on adipogenesis  have  utilized  the  standard  3T3-L1  cells,  which  are  preadipocytes, and do not retain stem cell properties. Hence, they are not suitable to study MSC commitment. Thus, this study was undertaken to assess whether CPM and PER can affect adipogenic lineage commitment of MSCs, and if autophagy is involved in this process since it is shown to regulate MSC function. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating CPM and PER pre-treatment induced enhancement of adipogenic commitment of MSCs. The study also shows inhibition/ reduction of autophagy by these pyrethroids in MSCs.
 Our  results  show  that  both  pyrethroids  at  100 µ M concentration affect MSC commitment without affecting cell viability. Although 100 µ M seems high concentration but CYP levels upto 77 µ M have been reported in blood samples of farmers, and 100 µ M has been used in in vitro studies . Numerous studies  have  shown  cytotoxic  and  non-cytotoxic  effects  of  these
 Fig. 2. PER and CPM exposure increases adipogenic differentiation of MSCs. MSCs were treated with various concentrations of PER and CPM (1, 10 and 100 µ M) for 24 h followed by adipogenic stimulus for 7 and 14 days. Adipogenesis was measured through fluorescence microscopy by nile red staining on 7th day (A, C, E, G) and perilipin on 14th day (B, D, F, H) (10 × magnification). Scale bar = 20 µ m. Data are represented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiment performed in triplicate. *** P &lt; 0.0001, ** P &lt; 0.001, * P &lt; 0.01 and ns = non- significant. Expression of adipogenic markers PPAR γ , C/EBP α , and FABP4 were evaluated upon PER and CPM exposure (100 µ M) through western blotting (I, J). Data are represented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed in duplicate. ***P &lt; 0.0001, **P &lt; 0.001 and ns = non- significant. Comparison between groups was done by Student ' s t -test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett ' s Multiple Comparison Test. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
 
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;DGLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;G
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;
 ￥
 Fig. 3. Adipogenic differentiation of MSC is associated with inhibition of autophagy in response to PER and CPM treatment. MSCs were treated with 100 µ M of PER and CPM for 24 h. Autophagy level in MSCs was monitored through western blotting of major autophagy proteins (LC3II and p62) (A, B). Autophagy flux assessment was done by treating PER and CPM, with or without CQ and rapamycin (Rapa). Levels of LC3II and p62 were measured by western blotting (C, D). Data are represented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed in duplicate. ***P &lt; 0.0001, **P &lt; 0.001, *P &lt; 0.01 and ns = non- significant. Comparison between groups was done by Student ' s t-test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey ' s Multiple Comparison Test.
 
 pyrethroids in different cell types . The variation in response is due to differences  in  concentration,  treatment  schedule,  and  the  inherent physiology of different cells.
 Pre-treatment (24 h) of MSCs with CPM and PER before giving adipogenic stimulus was adapted as the approach in order to study the effect on MSC, which is different from published reports of PER and CPM effect  on  adipogenesis  .  Enhanced ability of MSCs to give rise to adipocytes upon pyrethroid pre-treatment is  observed in our study. Broadly, this result is in line with previous reports demonstrating increased adipogenesis in cell line, mainly 3T3-L1 , and in in vivo models like C. elegans  and mouse , upon pyrethroid treatment. The study by Xiao et al. also highlights the fact that fat accumulation in PER exposed mice takes place when mice are fed high fat diet . These studies differ from ours as they have used 3T3-L1 cells (a preadipocyte cell line), lower concentration of pyrethroids and longer duration of treatment compared to 24 h pre-treatment in this study. So in those studies the impact was monitored on the overall adipogenesis process and not specifically on adipogenic commitment.
 Autophagy has been reported to regulate adipogenesis . Our data shows autophagy inhibiting activity of CPM and PER in MSCs as their treatment  resulted  in  accumulation  of  autophagic  substrate  p62  and autophagosome marker LC3II. CPM mediated autophagy inhibition and activation has been reported in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells  and 3T3-L1 cells , at 15 µ M and 100 µ M concentration, respectively. In murine macrophage RAW 264.7 cell line, short treatment (upto 24 h) of CPM (100 µ M) activated autophagy while longer treatment impaired autophagy . Natural pyrethrins have been shown to induce autophagy in HepG2 cells (Yang et al.,
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;DGLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;G
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;
 CPM
 Fig. 4. PER and CPM mediated inhibition of autophagy increases adipogenic differentiation. MSCs were treated with 100 µ M of PER or CPM for 24 h, alone or in combination with CQ and rapamycin (Rapa). Adipogenic differentiation was observed and quantified by nile red imaging on 7th day (A, C, E, G) and perilipin on 14th day (B, D, F, H) (10 × magnification). Scale bar = 20 µ m. Data are represented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. ***P &lt; 0.0001, **P &lt; 0.001, *P &lt; 0.01 and ns = non- significant. Expression of adipogenic markers was evaluated by western blotting (I, J). Data are represented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed in duplicate. ***P &lt; 0.0001, **P &lt; 0.001, *P &lt; 0.01 and ns = non- significant. Comparison between different groups was performed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey ' s Multiple Comparison Test. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
 
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;DGLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;G
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;
 2018),  while  allethrin  (100 µ M)  and  prallethrin  (100 µ M)  induced autophagy in human PBMCs . Thus, pyrethroids, in general,  seem  to  affect  autophagy  but  the  response  varies  among different cell types. However, we did not come across any report on PER mediated autophagic alteration. Different modes of action of different pyrethroids involving AMPK , ERK1/2 , oxidative stress , lysosome dysfunction , etc. are involved in autophagic perturbation. In this study, we have not looked at the mode of action of pyrethroids since our interest was to assess whether autophagic modulation was involved in CPM and PER mediated perturbation in adipogenic commitment of MSCs.
 An exciting observation was that CQ (an established autophagy inhibitor) pre-treatment of MSCs showed enhanced generation of adipocytes, similar to CPM and PER, and rapamycin, an autophagy activator, resulted in opposite effect. This observation strengthened our hypothesis that autophagy can affect MSC lineage commitment. Similar findings have been reported by Nuschke et al. upon rapamycin and bafilomycin treatment of human MSCs for 3 h during the initiation of differentiation . Low levels of autophagy in MSCs from aged mice also exhibited higher adipogenic potential,  and  3-methyladenine (autophagy inhibitor) treatment of MSCs from young mice also resulted in an aged state with high adipogenic differentiation capacity . γ -tocotrienol  mediated  activation  of  autophagy  as  well suppressed  adipogenesis  in  adipose  derived  stem  cells  . In contrast, inhibiting autophagy by knocking down Atg5  or Atg7  in 3T3-L1 cells, or in vivo by systemic chloroquine administration  or adipocyte specific  Atg7  knockdown    reduced  adipogenic differentiation.  These  reports  suggest  differing  role  of  autophagy  at different  stages  of  adipogenesis.  Focusing  at  the  stem  cell  level,  the published reports along with our observations highlight a potent role of basal autophagic level of MSCs on adipogenic differentiation in response to stimulus. However, the data presented in this study is based on acute pre-treatment.  It  remains  to  be  determined  how  chronic  exposure  is likely to affect MSCs.
 All  these  data  raise  an  interesting  question  how  changes in  autophagy level in MSCs regulates adipogenic commitment, which remains unaddressed.  Possibilities  include  autophagy  mediated  regulation  of ROS  since ROS promotes adipogenesis , repression of proteasome-dependent PPAR γ 2 degradation , and selective degradation of FABP3, which promotes adipogenesis, via autophagy receptor optineurin . A recent study has described the role of chaperone-mediated autophagy in adipocyte differentiation, but this work focused on early adipogenic differentiation and not adipogenic commitment of MSCs . Thus, the exact mechanism of autophagic regulation of adipogenic commitment needs further investigation. In this direction, we are undertaking  proteomics  approach  to  decipher  autophagic  control  in MSC lineage commitment.
 ## 5. Conclusion
 In conclusion, this study provides evidence for the tolerant nature of MSCs not showing cytotoxicity to CPM and PER, and the autophagy inhibiting capability of these pyrethroids upon acute exposure of 24 h. It also demonstrates that pyrethroids, CPM and PER, as well as CQ program MSCs, by reducing basal autophagy, into a pro-adipogenic state exhibiting enhanced adipogenic potential during long-term differentiation.  Therefore,  targeting  basal  autophagy  could  be  an  interesting approach to regulate MSC adipogenic commitment. It also points to the fact  that  exposure  to  these  pyrethroids  coupled  with  unhealthy  diet, such as high fat diet, might lead to fat accumulation in the body.
 ## Funding
 This study was supported by CSIR-IITR institutional funding.
 ## CRediT authorship contribution statement
 Julee  Verma: Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal  analysis,  Data curation,  Visualization,  Writing -original  draft. Ajit  Kumar  Rai: Writing -original  draft. Neeraj  Kumar  Satija: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Writing -review &amp; editing.
 ## Declaration of Competing Interest
 The authors declare no competing interests.
 ## Acknowledgements
 Authors  are  thankful  to  Director,  CSIR-IITR  for  constant  support during the study. Julee Verma and Ajit Kumar Rai are recipients of a Senior  Research  Fellowship  from  University  Grant  Commission,  New Delhi. The funders play no part in planning the study, collecting and analysing the data, making the decision to publish, or writing the report. CSIR-IITR manuscript communication number is IITR/SEC/MS/2023/ 23.
 ## Appendix A. Supplementary data
 Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.pestbp.2023.105566.
 ## References
 - Afolabi, O.K., Aderibigbe, F.A., Folarin, D.T., Arinola, A., Wusu, A.D., 2019. Oxidative stress and inflammation following sub-lethal oral exposure of cypermethrin in rats: mitigating potential of epicatechin. Heliyon 5, e02274.
- AlKahtane, A.A., Alarifi, S., Al-Qahtani, A.A., Ali, D., Alomar, S.Y., Aleissia, M.S., Alkahtani, S., 2018. Cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of Cypermethrin in Hepatocarcinoma cells: a dose- and time-dependent study. Dose-Response 16, 1559325818760880.
- Atashi, F., Modarressi, A., Pepper, M.S., 2015. The role of reactive oxygen species in mesenchymal stem cell adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation: a review. Stem Cells Dev. 24, 1150 -1163.
- Azmi, M.A., Naqvi, S.N., Azmi, M.A., Aslam, M., 2006. Effect of pesticide residues on health and different enzyme levels in the blood of farm workers from Gadap (rural area) Karachi-Pakistan. Chemosphere 64, 1739 -1744.
- Denu, R.A., Hematti, P., 2016. Effects of oxidative stress on mesenchymal stem cell biology. Oxidative Med. Cell. Longev. 2016, 2989076.
- Dewailly, E., Forde, M., Robertson, L., Kaddar, N., Laouan Sidi, E.A., C ˆ ot ´ e, S., Gaudreau, E., Drescher, O., Ayotte, P., 2014. Evaluation of pyrethroid exposures in pregnant women from 10 Caribbean countries. Environ. Int. 63, 201 -206.
- Furuhashi, M., Saitoh, S., Shimamoto, K., Miura, T., 2014. Fatty acid-binding protein 4 (FABP4): pathophysiological insights and potent clinical biomarker of metabolic and cardiovascular diseases. Clin. Med. Insight. Cardiol. 8, 23 -33.
- García-Prat, L., Martínez-Vicente, M., Perdiguero, E., Ortet, L., Rodríguez-Ubreva, J., Rebollo, E., Ruiz-Bonilla, V., Gutarra, S., Ballestar, E., Serrano, A.L., Sandri, M., Mu ˜ noz-C ´ anoves, P., 2016. Autophagy maintains stemness by preventing senescence. Nature 529, 37 -42.
- He, B., Wang, X., Zhu, J., Kong, B., Wei, L., Jin, Y., Fu, Z., 2019. Autophagy protects murine macrophages from β -cypermethrin-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and cytotoxicity via the reduction of oxidation stress. Environ. Pollut. 250, 416 -425.
- He, B., Wang, X., Jin, X., Xue, Z., Zhu, J., Wang, C., Jin, Y., Fu, Z., 2020. β -Cypermethrin promotes the adipogenesis of 3T3-L1 cells via inducing autophagy and shaping an adipogenesis-friendly microenvironment. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. Shanghai 52, 821 -831.
- Huang, F., Liu, Q., Xie, S., Xu, J., Huang, B., Wu, Y., Xia, D., 2016. Cypermethrin induces macrophages death through cell cycle arrest and oxidative stress-mediated JNK/ERK signaling regulated apoptosis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 17, 885.
- Jansen, H.J., van Essen, P., Koenen, T., Joosten, L.A., Netea, M.G., Tack, C.J., Stienstra, R., 2012. Autophagy activity is up-regulated in adipose tissue of obese individuals and modulates proinflammatory cytokine expression. Endocrinology 153, 5866 -5874.
- Jiang, F., Peng, Y., Sun, Q., 2022. Pesticides exposure induced obesity and its associated diseases: recent progress and challenges. J. Futur. Foods 2, 119 -124.
- Kaushik, S., Juste, Y.R., Lindenau, K., Dong, S., Macho-Gonz ´ alez, A., SantiagoFern ´ andez, O., McCabe, M., Singh, R., Gavathiotis, E., Cuervo, A.M., 2022.
 - Chaperone-mediated autophagy regulates adipocyte differentiation. Sci. Adv. 8, eabq2733.
- Kiffin, R., Bandyopadhyay, U., Cuervo, A.M.J.A., R. Signaling, 2006. Oxidative stress and autophagyAntioxid Redox Signal, 8, 152 -162.
- Kim, J., Park, Y., Yoon, K.S., Clark, J.M., Park, Y., 2014. Permethrin alters adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and causes insulin resistance in C2C12 myotubes. J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol. 28, 418 -424.
- Kovsan, J., Blüher, M., Tarnovscki, T., Kl ¨ oting, N., Kirshtein, B., Madar, L., Shai, I., Golan, R., Harman-Boehm, I., Sch ¨ on, M.R., Greenberg, A.S., Elazar, Z., Bashan, N., Rudich, A., 2011. Altered autophagy in human adipose tissues in obesity. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 96, E268 -E277.
- Liu, Z.Z., Hong, C.G., Hu, W.B., Chen, M.L., Duan, R., Li, H.M., Yue, T., Cao, J., Wang, Z. X., Chen, C.Y., Hu, X.K., Wu, B., Liu, H.M., Tan, Y.J., Liu, J.H., Luo, Z.W., Zhang, Y., Rao, S.S., Luo, M.J., Yin, H., Wang, Y.Y., Xia, K., Xu, L., Tang, S.Y., Hu, R.G., Xie, H., 2021. Autophagy receptor OPTN (optineurin) regulates mesenchymal stem cell fate and bone-fat balance during aging by clearing FABP3. Autophagy 17, 2766 -2782.
- Lu, Q., Sun, Y., Ares, I., Anad ´ on, A., Martínez, M., Martínez-Larra ˜ naga, M.R., Yuan, Z., Wang, X., Martínez, M.A., 2019. Deltamethrin toxicity: a review of oxidative stress and metabolism. Environ. Res. 170, 260 -281.
- Ma, Y., Qi, M., An, Y., Zhang, L., Yang, R., Doro, D.H., Liu, W., Jin, Y., 2018. Autophagy controls mesenchymal stem cell properties and senescence during bone aging. Aging Cell 17, e12709.
- Mishra, A.K., Mishra, S., Rajput, C., Ur Rasheed, M.S., Patel, D.K., Singh, M.P., 2018. Cypermethrin activates autophagosome formation albeit inhibits autophagy owing to poor lysosome quality: relevance to Parkinson ' s disease. Neurotox. Res. 33, 377 -387.
- Nu ˜ nez, C.E., Rodrigues, V.S., Gomes, F.S., Moura, R.F., Victorio, S.C., Bombassaro, B., Chaim, E.A., Pareja, J.C., Geloneze, B., Velloso, L.A., Araujo, E.P., 2013. Defective regulation of adipose tissue autophagy in obesity. Int. J. Obes. 37, 1473 -1480.
- Nuschke, A., Rodrigues, M., Stolz, D.B., Chu, C.T., Griffith, L., Wells, A., 2014. Human mesenchymal stem cells/multipotent stromal cells consume accumulated autophagosomes early in differentiation. Stem Cell Res Ther 5, 140.
- Puvula, J., Maddu, N., Gutam, N., Parimal, A., Raghavendra, P.B., 2022. The role of pyrethroid derivatives in autophagy and apoptosis crosstalk signaling and potential risk for malignancies. Oncotarget 13, 1323 -1340.
- Raszewski, G., Lemieszek, M.K., Ł ukawski, K., 2016. Cytotoxicity induced by cypermethrin in human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y. Ann. Agric. Environ. Med. 23, 106 -110.
- Romero, A., Ramos, E., Ares, I., Castellano, V., Martínez, M., Martínez-Larra ˜ naga, M.R., Anad ´ on, A., Martínez, M.A., 2017. Oxidative stress and gene expression profiling of cell death pathways in alpha-cypermethrin-treated SH-SY5Y cells. Arch. Toxicol. 91, 2151 -2164.
- Rosen, E.D., MacDougald, O.A., 2006. Adipocyte differentiation from the inside out. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 885 -896.
- Rosen, E.D., Sarraf, P., Troy, A.E., Bradwin, G., Moore, K., Milstone, D.S., Spiegelman, B. M., Mortensen, R.M., 1999. PPAR gamma is required for the differentiation of adipose tissue in vivo and in vitro. Mol. Cell 4, 611 -617.
- Rosen, E.D., Hsu, C.H., Wang, X., Sakai, S., Freeman, M.W., Gonzalez, F.J., Spiegelman, B.M., 2002. C/EBPalpha induces adipogenesis through PPARgamma: a unified pathway. Genes Dev. 16, 22 -26.
- Sacks, D., Baxter, B., Campbell, B.C.V., Carpenter, J.S., Cognard, C., Dippel, D., Eesa, M., Fischer, U., Hausegger, K., Hirsch, J.A., Shazam Hussain, M., Jansen, O., Jayaraman, M.V., Khalessi, A.A., Kluck, B.W., Lavine, S., Meyers, P.M., Ramee, S., Rüfenacht, D.A., Schirmer, C.M., Vorwerk, D., 2018. Multisociety consensus quality improvement revised consensus statement for endovascular therapy of acute ischemic stroke. Int. J. Stroke 13, 612 -632.
- Sbrana, F.V., Cortini, M., Avnet, S., Perut, F., Columbaro, M., De Milito, A., Baldini, N., 2016. The role of autophagy in the maintenance of Stemness and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cell Rev. Rep. 12, 621 -633.
- Sekar, M., Thirumurugan, K., 2022. Autophagy: a molecular switch to regulate adipogenesis and lipolysis. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 477, 727 -742.
- Shen, P., Hsieh, T.H., Yue, Y., Sun, Q., Clark, J.M., Park, Y., 2017. Deltamethrin increases the fat accumulation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and Caenorhabditis elegans. Food Chem. Toxicol. 101, 149 -156.
- Silver, M.K., Shao, J., Chen, M., Xia, Y., Lozoff, B., Meeker, J.D., 2015. Distribution and predictors of pesticides in the umbilical cord blood of Chinese newborns. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 13, 94.
- Song, B.Q., Chi, Y., Li, X., Du, W.J., Han, Z.B., Tian, J.J., Li, J.J., Chen, F., Wu, H.H., Han, L.X., Lu, S.H., Zheng, Y.Z., Han, Z.C., 2015. Inhibition of notch signaling promotes the Adipogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells through autophagy activation and PTEN-PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 36, 1991 -2002.
- Spalletta, S., Flati, V., Toniato, E., Di Gregorio, J., Marino, A., Pierdomenico, L., Marchisio, M., D ' Orazi, G., Cacciatore, I., Robuffo, I., 2018. Carvacrol reduces adipogenic differentiation by modulating autophagy and ChREBP expression. PLoS One 13, e0206894.
- Wang, X., Martínez, M.A., Dai, M., Chen, D., Ares, I., Romero, A., Castellano, V., Martínez, M., Rodríguez, J.L., Martínez-Larra ˜ naga, M.R., Anad ´ on, A., Yuan, Z., 2016. Permethrin-induced oxidative stress and toxicity and metabolism. A review. Environ. Res. 149, 86 -104.
- Wang, B., Tsakiridis, E.E., Zhang, S., Llanos, A., Desjardins, E.M., Yabut, J.M., Green, A. E., Day, E.A., Smith, B.K., Lally, J.S.V., Wu, J., Raphenya, A.R., Srinivasan, K.A., McArthur, A.G., Kajimura, S., Patel, J.S., Wade, M.G., Morrison, K.M., Holloway, A. C., Steinberg, G.R., 2021. The pesticide chlorpyrifos promotes obesity by inhibiting diet-induced thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue. Nat. Commun. 12, 5163.
- Xiao, X., Qi, W., Clark, J.M., Park, Y., 2017. Permethrin potentiates adipogenesis via intracellular calcium and endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated mechanisms in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Food Chem. Toxicol. 109, 123 -129.
- Xiao, X., Sun, Q., Kim, Y., Yang, S.H., Qi, W., Kim, D., Yoon, K.S., Clark, J.M., Park, Y., 2018. Exposure to permethrin promotes high fat diet-induced weight gain and insulin resistance in male C57BL/6J mice. Food Chem. Toxicol. 111, 405 -416.
- Yang, Y., Gao, J., Zhang, Y., Xu, W., Hao, Y., Xu, Z., Tao, L., 2018. Natural pyrethrins induce autophagy of HepG2 cells through the activation of AMPK/mTOR pathway. Environ. Pollut. 241, 1091 -1097.
- Yu, W., Chen, C.Z., Peng, Y., Li, Z., Gao, Y., Liang, S., Yuan, B., Kim, N.H., Jiang, H., Zhang, J.B., 2021. KRAS affects Adipogenic differentiation by regulating autophagy and MAPK activation in 3T3-L1 and C2C12 cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 13630.
- Yuan, L., Lin, J., Xu, Y., Peng, Y., Clark, J.M., Gao, R., Park, Y., Sun, Q., 2019. Deltamethrin promotes adipogenesis via AMPK α and ER stress-mediated pathway in 3T3- L1 adipocytes and Caenorhabditis elegans. Food Chem. Toxicol. 134, 110791.
- Yun, H.R., Jo, Y.H., Kim, J., Shin, Y., Kim, S.S., Choi, T.G.J.I.J.O.M.S., 2020. Roles of Autophagy in Oxidative Stress. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 3289.
- Zhang, C., He, Y., Okutsu, M., Ong, L.C., Jin, Y., Zheng, L., Chow, P., Yu, S., Zhang, M., Yan, Z., 2013. Autophagy is involved in adipogenic differentiation by repressesing proteasome-dependent PPAR γ 2 degradation. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 305, E530 -E539.
- Zhao, L., Ha, J.H., Okla, M., Chung, S., 2014. Activation of autophagy and AMPK by gamma-tocotrienol suppresses the adipogenesis in human adipose derived stem cells. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 58, 569 -579.
- Zuo, L., Chen, L., Chen, X., Liu, M., Chen, H., Hao, G., 2022. Pyrethroids exposure induces obesity and cardiometabolic diseases in a sex-different manner. Chemosphere 291, 132935.
 GLYPH&lt;0&gt;DGLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;G