Kafkas Univ Vet Fak Derg 23 (2): 297-303, 2017 DOI: 10.9775/kvfd.2016.16501
 KafKas Universitesi veteriner faKUltesi Dergisi JoUrnal Home-Page: http://vetdergi.kafkas.edu.tr online sUbmission: http://vetdergikafkas.org
 ## Research Article
 ## In Vitro Toxicity of Some Pesticides on Goat and Dog Spermatozoa   
 Begüm YURDAKÖK-DİKMEN  1  Koray TEKİN  2      Mehmet Borga TIRPAN  2 Ali DAŞKIN  2      Ayhan FİLAZİ  3
 -    This study was presented in '13 th  International Congress of the European Association for Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology ' held between 19-22 July 2015 in Nantes-France as oral presentation.
-     Part of this study was presented '5 th   National Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology Congress' held between 1-4 September 2016, Bursa - Turkey as oral presentation 3. 1  Ankara University Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, TR-06110 Ankara TURKEY 4. 2   Ankara University Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Reproduction and Artificial Insemination, TR-06110 Ankara - TURKEY
 Article Code: KVFD-2016-16501    Received: 14.07.2016    Accepted: 03.10.2016    Published Online: 14.10.2016
 ## Citation of This Article
 Yurdakök-Dikmen B, Tekin K, Tırpan MB, Daşkın A, Filazi A: In vitro toxicity of some pesticides on goat and dog spermatozoa. Kafkas Univ Vet Fak Derg, 23 (2): 297-303, 2017 . DOI: 10.9775/kvfd.2016.16501
 ## Abstract
 In  vitro toxic  effects  of  selected  pesticides  (cypermethrin,  flumethrin,  propoxur,  carbaryl,  chlorpyrifos,  metamidophos)  were  evaluated on dog and buck fresh spermatozoa using MTT (mitochondrial activity/viability), NeutralRed-NR (lysosomal activity/viability) and CASA (motility parameters/VCL, VSL, VAP, linearity, straightness, wobble) tests. For buck, the most toxic compounds were carbamates followed by organophosphate and pyrethroids. Carbamates, again induced the highest toxicity in dog sperm, followed by pyrethroids. In general, all pesticide treatments were found to increase the hyperactivity of buck spermatozoa except flumethrin; whereas a decrease was present for dog spermatozoa (except carbaryl). A decrease of VCL, VSL and VAP parameters was evident in buck (P&lt;0.05), whereas no difference was found in dog sperm (P&gt;0.05). Overall, flumethrin was found to induce less effect on motility parameters compared to cypermethrin. As a conclusion, the combination of MTT and CASA along with NR would provide more accurate data for the in vitro evaluation of chemicals on  spermatozoa;  where  alternative  testing  strategies  for  the  ReproTox  tests  (especially  for  cosmetic  product  safety  assessment  where animal testing is banned) are recommended nowadays with battery strategies and species specific differences would play a key role for understanding the defense mechanisms.
 Keywords: Pesticides, Buck spermatozoa, Dog spermatozoa, In vitro toxicity, MTT, CASA, Neutral red
 ## Bazı Pestisitlerin Teke ve Köpek Sperması Üzerine İn Vitro Toksisiteleri
 ## Özet
 Bu çalışmada, bazı pestisitlerin (sipermetrin, flumetrin, propoksur, karbaril, klorprifos, metamidofos) köpek ve teke taze spermaları üzerindeki etkileri, MTT (mitokondriyal etkinlik/canlılık), Nötral Kırmızı-NK (lizozomal etkinlik/canlılık) ve Bilgisayar Destekli Semen Analizi-CASA (motilite parametreleri, VCL, VSL, VAP , lineerlik, doğrusallık, yalpalama) kullanılarak in vitro olarak araştırıldı. Teke sperması üzerine canlılık ve motilite bakımından en toksik bileşiğin karbamatlar, ardından organofosfatlar ve piretroitler olduğu; köpek spermasında ise aynı şekilde karbamatların, ardından da piretroitlerin toksik etki gösterdiği tespit edildi. Genel olarak tüm pestisit uygulamalarının teke spermasında hiperaktiviteyi (flumetrin  dışında)  arttırdığı,  köpek  spermasında  ise  azalttığı  tespit  edildi  (karbaril  dışında).  Tekede  VCL,  VSL  ve  VAP  parametrelerinde azalma  gözlenirken  (P&lt;0.05),  köpek  spermasında  anlamlı  bir  fark  gözlenmedi  (P&gt;0.05).  Piretroitler  arasında  flumetrinin,  motilite parametreleri  üzerine  etkisi  sipermetrine  göre  daha  az  bulundu.  Sonuç  olarak  üreme  toksisite  testlerinde  (özellikle  kozmetik  ürünlerin toksisite testlerinde hayvan deneylerinin yasaklandığı göz önünde bulundurularak) alternatif testler arasında bulunan ve batarya testleri içerisinde yer alan in vitro sperm toksisite araştırmalarında; MTT ve CASA ile birlikte NK'nın birlikte kullanılmasının kimyasalların sperma üzerine etkilerinin değerlendirilmesinde daha etkili olacağı ve türe özgü farklılıkların kimyasalların sperma canlılık ve motilite parametrelerini farklı  şekil  ve  düzeyde  etkileyeceği,  dolayısıyla  spermada  türe  özgü  ksenobiyotik  moleküler  savunma  mekanizmalarının  araştırılmasının gerekliliği gösterilmiştir.
 Anahtar sözcükler: Pestisitler, Teke sperması, Köpek sperması, İn vitro toksisite, MTT, CASA, Nötral kırmızı
 
 
 İletişim (Correspondence)
 
 
 +90 312 3170315/4290
 
 ## INTRODUCTION
 Male  infertility  due  to  impaired  semen  quality  is related  to  a  variety  of  possible  causes  including  genetic abnormalities,  lifestyle  (smoking,  alcohol,  clothing  etc), diseases (Brucella,  Chlamydia) ,  condition (varicocele, hematocele and torsion) ,  environment  and  occupation (hormone disrupters-xenoestrogens, anti-androgens, toxic substances-lead  etc.)  .  The  physiological  mechanisms  that ultimately lead to healthy sperm production is complex; where  a  disturbance  can  take  place  at  different  periods in a lifetime and differ for each species  .  Along with the increased  concern  on  endocrine  disrupting  compounds, mainly  due  to  their  effects  on  triggering  morphological and  functional  abnormalities  in  reproduction  systems, screening chemicals for male infertility raised an increasing interest.  Since  March of 2013, European cosmetic products cannot be tested on animal for reproductive toxicity (the 7 th amendment to the European Union's Cosmetics Directive). Non-animal in vitro alternative tests for the assessment of the effects of chemicals on reproductive system have been developed  and  many  of  them  are  validated.  However, these  models  are  often  not  fully  reflective  of  physiological processes and need to be complemented with additional tests  to  accurately  illustrate  the  overall  reproductive function.  Innovative  non  animal  testing  strategies  are sought from regulatory authorities for rapid and accurate detection strategies   .
 Sperm  motility  is  considered  as  one  of  the  most important parameters in evaluating the fertilizing ability of  sperm in the human or other mammal species where motility  parameters  directly  affect  sperm  penetration  of mucus or  oocyte  vestments  .  The  conventional,  manual method  of  sperm  count  and  assessment  of  motility under  the  optical  microscope  was  found  to  be  fraught with  inevitable  subjective  .  Computer-assisted  sperm analysis  (CASA)  has  been  developed  as  a  sensitive  and reliable method in the quantification of deficiencies in sperm motility pattern and, together with assessment of sperm concentration and viability for the evaluation of the fertilizing ability of an ejaculate  .
 The  aim  of  this  study  was  to  evaluate  the in  vitro effects of pesticides (carbaryl, chlorpyrifos, cypermethrin, flumethrin,  methamidophos and propoxur) on  dog  and goat  spermatozoa  using  MTT  and  Neutral  Red  tests  for viability  and  CASA  system  for  the  motility.  In  particular, the  combination  of  viability  assays  and  comparative investigation  of  species  specific  differences  for  the evaluation of xenobiotic exposure on spermatozoa in vitro has never been performed. Even though the combination MTT and CASA analysis as an objective, simple, inexpensive and efficient method for the screening of xenobiotics in spermatozoa was introduced previously, species specific differences  are  expected  to  provide  an  important  aspect for the evaluation of these chemicals.
 ## MATERIAL and METHODS
 Animal  experiments  were  conducted  according  to ethical  principles  and  this  study  was  approved  by  the animal  ethics  committee  in  Ankara  University  .
 Semen  samples  were  collected  from  Angora  buck (4  years  of  age)  under  uniform  feeding  and  housing conditions  in  Ankara  University  Faculty  of  Veterinary Medicine  Research  Farm,  where  they  are  proven  to  be free  from  any  general  or  genital  diseases.  Ejaculate  was collected  with  the  aid  of  an  electro  ejaculator  (Ruakura®, New Zealand). Animals were strained and topical lidocaine was  used  to  reduce  the  pain  caused  by  rectal  smooth muscle  spasm  or intra  pelvic  nerve stimulation,  then  after probe  was  inserted  into rectum .  Ejaculate  from  buck  were directly immersed in a water bath at 35.5°C until it could be assessed  for  total  and  progressive  motility  as  well  as  sperm concentration. Then samples at 35.5°C were cooled down to 24°C for laboratory transfer.
 Semen  samples  from  the  known  healthy  fertile German shepherd male dog (2 years of age and sired a litter  previously)  were  collected  by  digital  manipulation. The  first  and  third  fraction  were  collected  in  two  separate pre-warmed plastic tubes. The volume of 1 st  fraction, 2 nd fraction  and  3 rd fraction  with  a  graduated  collection  tubes and pH were determined with stripes. Only the second sperm-rich fraction  of  ejaculate  collected  was  used  for  the experimental design.
 Semen was evaluated macroscopically  for  volume,  color and pH; microscopically  for  motility,  concentration,  viability and  morphology. Total  semen  volume  was  determined from  the  graded  collection  tube  soon  after  collection and the concentration was determined using an Accucell photometer.  Spermatozoa  were  primarily  analyzed  by CASA and only ejaculates with a minimum concentration of  3×10 9   spermatozoa/mL and 75% progressively motile cells  were  used  for  dilution  to  a  final  concentration  of 3.6×10 6 /mL  spermatozoa.  For  the  dilutions  a  Tris-based extender  (30.7  g  of  Tris,  16.4  g  of  citric  acid,  12.6  g  of fructose and 1000 mL of distilled water at a pH of 6.8 with no cryoprotectant) was used.
 For  cytotoxicity  studies,  collected  sperm  in  Tris  buffer were  transferred  to  96-well  plates  at  3.6×10 6   sperm/mL per  well  (100  µL  per  well).  Pesticides (carbaryl,  chlorpyrifos, cypermethrin,  flumethrin,  methamidophos and propoxur) were  dissolved  in  Tris  buffer  (only  for flumethrin 500  µL DMSO  and  500  µL  Tris)  at  1000  µg/µL  concentration. Working  solutions  at  log  conc.  first,  then  half  conc.  were prepared (166.67-0.0000167 µg/µL per well). Viability  was measured  using  MTT  and  Neutral  Red  Assays;  wherein MTT,  metabolic  activity  of  the  cells  are  evaluated  by  the conversion of a yellow tetrazolium salt to purple formazan particles  by  mitochondrial  succinate  dehydrogenase  of
 intact mitochondria of living cells and in Neutral Red, viable cells  incorporate  and  bind  the  supravital  neutral  red  dye  in viable  lysosomes. MTT assay was performed according to our  previous  study  on  sperm    modified  from  Mosmann  and neutral red assay was performed according to Repetto et  al.  .  Viability  assays  were  both  then  quantified using a micro  plate  reader  (SpectraMax  i3x-Multimode  Detection Platform,  Molecular  Devices,  Sunnyvale,  CA,  USA)  at 540  nm.  Cytotoxicity  values,  expressed  as  percentage, was calculated  with  regard  to  the  untreated  cell  control (containing only the vehicle buffer), which was set to 100% viability  and  the  dead  cell  control  (containing Triton-X) which  was  set  to  0%  viability.  A  plot  of  %  cytotoxicity versus  sample  concentrations  was  used  to  calculate  the concentration  which  was  then  evaluated  to  calculate  50% cytotoxicity defining IC 50 value.
 For  motility  studies,  collected  sperm  in Tris  buffer  were transferred  to  96-well  plates  at  3.6×10 6 sperm/mL  per  well (100  µL  per  well).  Pesticides  were  dissolved  in  Tris  buffer (only  for flumethrin 500  µL  DMSO  and  500  µL  Tris)  and prepared in the stock concentrations to be applied at IC50 doses  in  20  µL  IC 50 ,  IC 50 /2,  IC 50 /4  and  IC 50 /8  concentrations were applied for both sperms. The results were recorded at 0 and 4 th  hour following the exposure.
 A  5  µL  sperm  suspension  was  placed  on  preheated siliconized slides and covered with 22 × 22 mm 2  coverslips to  achieve a calculated depth of 20 psm. Sperm movement was recorded using a 100 frame/s camera (Basler, 782 × 582 resolution) attached to a microscope (600×, Nikon eclipse 50I,  SCA,  Barcelona,  Spain)  with  a  phase-contrast  objective (10  ×  10  magnification)  and  connected  to  a  computerized motion  analysis  system,  the  Sperm  Class  Analyzer  (SCA, Microptics®, Spain).
 The  sperm  motility  characteristics  were  determined using  a  10×  objective  microscope  lens  at  37°C. The  SCA acquisition  parameters  were  set  with  5  µm 2 &lt;particle  area &lt;80 µm 2 ;  progressivity  &gt;8% of STR; Circular &lt;50% LIN; Vap points = 5; frame rate = 100/s; total captured images = 180 for  dog  and  10  µm 2 &lt;particle  area  &lt;80  µm 2 ;  progressivity &gt;75%  of  STR;  circular  &lt;50%  LIN;  Vap  points  =  5;  frame rate  =  100/s;  total  captured  images  =  180  for  goat.  Each recorded field consisted of a mean of five replicates, each one analyzing from 100 to 300 sperm tracks and minimum average  path  at  50  µm/s  and  40  µm/s;  with  &gt;50%  and &gt;55% progressive motility were accepted for dog and goat sperm, respectively. For 5 µL of each sample, at least 200 up to 300 spermatozoa in 5 different areas were evaluated.
 Measured  data  were  plotted  against  the  corresponding inhibition  values  using  NCSS  2007,  resulting  in  the inhibition  curves  as  regression  analysis,  selected  by  the highest  coefficient  of  determination  (R 2 );  where  IC 50 (half maximal  inhibitory  concentration)  values  were  calculated by interpolation of experimental data. Data were checked for  parametric  test  assumptions  by  Kolmogrov-Smirnov test  and  Levene  test  to  determine  the  homogeneity. Statistical  significance  between  the  pesticides  and  the animal  species  were  determined  by  one-way  ANOVA followed  by  posthoc  analysis.  A 'P'  value  of  &lt;0.05  was defined as statistically significant.
 ## RESULTS
 IC50 values  for methamidophos, chlorpyrifos, carbaryl, propoxur,  flumethrin and cypermethrine using  MTT  assays are  as  follows  in  µg/mL;  104.62;  3.61;  23.98;  15.14;  67.89; 1.71  for  dog  sperm  and  45.47;  11.36;  25.01;  1.47;  114.47; 1.58  for  buck  sperm.  IC 50 values  was  found  to  be  lower in  Neutral  Red  assay  (NR)  compared  to  MTT  in  general. IC50 values  for  the  tested  pesticides  using  NR  (except flumethrin ,  where  IC 50 cannot  be  calculated)  were  as follows  in  µg/mL;  33.16;  3.80;  20.47;  58.53;  ND;  0.79  for dog  and  19.45;  2.51;  25.40;  2.42;  ND;  0.39  for  buck (Table 1). IC 50 values  were  found  to  be  lower  in  buck  (P&lt;0.05) except carbaryl by  Neutral  Red  and  MTT  assays  and chlorpyrifos and flumethrin by  MTT  assay.  For  buck,  the most toxic  compounds were carbamates followed by organophosphate  and  pyrethroids. Carbamates ,  again induced  the  highest  toxicity  in  dog  sperm,  followed  by pyrethroids then organophosphates.
 All  pesticide  treatments  at  IC 50 /2  concentrations  were found  to  increase  the  hyperactivity  of  buck  spermatozoa except flumethrin (no  change was present). On the contrary
 | Table 1. IC 50 values for the tested pesticides on dog and buck sperm   | Table 1. IC 50 values for the tested pesticides on dog and buck sperm   | Table 1. IC 50 values for the tested pesticides on dog and buck sperm   | Table 1. IC 50 values for the tested pesticides on dog and buck sperm   | Table 1. IC 50 values for the tested pesticides on dog and buck sperm   | Table 1. IC 50 values for the tested pesticides on dog and buck sperm   | Table 1. IC 50 values for the tested pesticides on dog and buck sperm   | |-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------| | Chemical Family                                                         |                                                                         |                                                                         | IC 50                                                                   | IC 50                                                                   | IC 50                                                                   | IC 50                                                                   | |                                                                         | Main Mechanism of Action                                                | DrugName                                                                | MTT                                                                     | MTT                                                                     | Neutral Red                                                             | Neutral Red                                                             | |                                                                         |                                                                         |                                                                         | Dog                                                                     | Buck                                                                    | Dog                                                                     | Buck                                                                    | | Organophosphates                                                        | Acetylcholine esterase inhibitors (Irreversible)                        | Methamidophos                                                           | 104.62                                                                  | 45.47                                                                   | 33.16                                                                   | 19.45                                                                   | | Organophosphates                                                        | Acetylcholine esterase inhibitors (Irreversible)                        | Chlorpyrifos                                                            | 3.61                                                                    | 11.36                                                                   | 3.80                                                                    | 2.51                                                                    | | Carbamates                                                              | Acetylcholine esterase inhibitors (Reversible)                          | Carbaryl                                                                | 23.98                                                                   | 25.01                                                                   | 20.47                                                                   | 25.40                                                                   | | Carbamates                                                              | Acetylcholine esterase inhibitors (Reversible)                          | Propoxur                                                                | 15.14                                                                   | 1.47                                                                    | 58.53                                                                   | 2.42                                                                    | | Pyrethroids                                                             | Sodium channel modulators                                               | Flumethrin                                                              | 67.89                                                                   | 114.47                                                                  | ND                                                                      | ND                                                                      | | Pyrethroids                                                             | Sodium channel modulators                                               | Cypermethrin                                                            | 1.71                                                                    | 1.58                                                                    | 0.79                                                                    | 0.39                                                                    |
 | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 2. Effects on the kinetic parameters (VCL, VSL and VAP) of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | |-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| | %ofControl±SD                                                                                                         | %ofControl±SD                                                                                                         | %ofControl±SD                                                                                                         | Curvilinear Velocity                                                                                                  | Curvilinear Velocity                                                                                                  | (VCL) Straightline Velocity                                                                                           | (VCL) Straightline Velocity                                                                                           | Average PathVelocity (VAP)                                                                                            | Average PathVelocity (VAP)                                                                                            | | (Total = Slow + Medium+Rapid)                                                                                         | (Total = Slow + Medium+Rapid)                                                                                         | (Total = Slow + Medium+Rapid)                                                                                         | Buck                                                                                                                  | Dog                                                                                                                   | Buck                                                                                                                  | Dog                                                                                                                   | Buck                                                                                                                  | Dog                                                                                                                   | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50                                                                                                                 | 117.10±26.56                                                                                                          | 89.01±6.18                                                                                                            | 85.24±12.72                                                                                                           | 92.73±8.38                                                                                                            | 101.84±29.13                                                                                                          | 97.57±6.38                                                                                                            | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /2                                                                                                              | 111.60±21.63                                                                                                          | 97.07±7.79                                                                                                            | 105.62±22.69                                                                                                          | 104.39±47.78                                                                                                          | 112.63±22.86                                                                                                          | 120.08±21.35                                                                                                          | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /4                                                                                                              | 137.04±26.56                                                                                                          | 103.14±10.42                                                                                                          | 130.89±28.13                                                                                                          | 79.03±20.62                                                                                                           | 134.80±27.36                                                                                                          | 84.95±5.05                                                                                                            | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /8                                                                                                              | 152.70±29.59                                                                                                          | 71.41±9.65                                                                                                            | 148.83±31.98                                                                                                          | 58.48±6.59                                                                                                            | 151.84±30.82                                                                                                          | 68.00±9.56                                                                                                            | | Organophosphates                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                       | IC 50                                                                                                                 | 40.52±7.46                                                                                                            | 39.43±3.95                                                                                                            | 48.42±0.99                                                                                                            | 33.58±1.07                                                                                                            | 42.37±1.65                                                                                                            | 35.01±2.11                                                                                                            | | Organophosphates                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /2                                                                                                              | 103.08±11.67                                                                                                          | 68.06±3.49                                                                                                            | 57.71±0.86                                                                                                            | 61.50±3.58                                                                                                            | 86.66±22.60                                                                                                           | 62.27±3.66                                                                                                            | | Organophosphates                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /4                                                                                                              | 74.99±8.49                                                                                                            | 95.51±4.32                                                                                                            | 70.26±1.05                                                                                                            | 80.78±15.82                                                                                                           | 64.06±1.92                                                                                                            | 83.76±8.54                                                                                                            | | Organophosphates                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /8                                                                                                              | 49.46±5.60                                                                                                            | 59.12±3.32                                                                                                            | 42.73±0.64                                                                                                            | 51.19±14.21                                                                                                           | 37.63±1.13                                                                                                            | 55.64±13.23                                                                                                           | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50                                                                                                                 | 103.81±17.53                                                                                                          | 99.36±6.90                                                                                                            | 92.88±2.69                                                                                                            | 130.41±11.69                                                                                                          | 96.71±8.58                                                                                                            | 112.39±7.35                                                                                                           | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /2                                                                                                              | 131.65±14.12                                                                                                          | 75.81±6.79                                                                                                            | 75.02±1.42                                                                                                            | 114.68±15.40                                                                                                          | 141.94±7.45                                                                                                           | 83.18±17.03                                                                                                           | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /4                                                                                                              | 82.34±8.83                                                                                                            | 72.04±6.35                                                                                                            | 64.77±1.23                                                                                                            | 146.46±11.86                                                                                                          | 66.79±3.50                                                                                                            | 88.62±4.20                                                                                                            | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /8                                                                                                              | 188.42±20.21                                                                                                          | 70.46±5.80                                                                                                            | 193.10±3.66                                                                                                           | 138.96±17.01                                                                                                          | 188.08±9.87                                                                                                           | 88.47±10.35                                                                                                           | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50                                                                                                                 | 40.92±9.66                                                                                                            | 75.00±5.21                                                                                                            | 35.85±15.48                                                                                                           | 78.22±7.07                                                                                                            | 37.32±6.47                                                                                                            | 87.42±5.72                                                                                                            | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /2                                                                                                              | 50.58±6.62                                                                                                            | 80.39±5.43                                                                                                            | 53.50±8.99                                                                                                            | 100.94±38.97                                                                                                          | 60.00±14.43                                                                                                           | 95.69±15.24                                                                                                           | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /4                                                                                                              | 57.51±7.53                                                                                                            | 62.38±4.40                                                                                                            | 58.81±9.89                                                                                                            | 107.42±22.86                                                                                                          | 60.83±4.49                                                                                                            | 86.94±26.90                                                                                                           | | Carbamates                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /8                                                                                                              | 105.02±13.75                                                                                                          | 71.52±4.08                                                                                                            | 136.18±22.89                                                                                                          | 101.50±12.67                                                                                                          | 126.87±9.36                                                                                                           | 93.43±25.99                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50                                                                                                                 | 41.99±8.09                                                                                                            | 92.19±14.18                                                                                                           | 45.28±3.03                                                                                                            | 78.15±11.93                                                                                                           | 41.23±4.36                                                                                                            | 91.75±18.76                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /2                                                                                                              | 99.46±11.58                                                                                                           | 100.38±18.46                                                                                                          | 80.68±2.43                                                                                                            | 86.63±26.42                                                                                                           | 79.63±4.62                                                                                                            | 91.44±27.76                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /4                                                                                                              | 48.59±5.66                                                                                                            | 62.78±15.04                                                                                                           | 58.21±1.76                                                                                                            | 99.32±30.60                                                                                                           | 50.85±2.95                                                                                                            | 85.26±11.34                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       | Pyrethroids                                                                                                           | IC 50 /8                                                                                                              | 63.22±7.36                                                                                                            | 62.77±12.25                                                                                                           | 88.93±2.68                                                                                                            | 85.73±14.33                                                                                                           | 73.76±4.28                                                                                                            | 74.93±23.66                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50                                                                                                                 | 37.34±2.46                                                                                                            | 107.64±10.78                                                                                                          | 31.16±9.92                                                                                                            | 97.79±3.11                                                                                                            | 34.32±5.68                                                                                                            | 103.00±6.21                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /2                                                                                                              | 67.06±3.60                                                                                                            | 81.54±11.41                                                                                                           | 84.35±16.23                                                                                                           | 89.85±15.25                                                                                                           | 74.54±7.51                                                                                                            | 85.26±14.75                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /4                                                                                                              | 52.77±2.84                                                                                                            | 86.19±12.76                                                                                                           | 70.11±13.49                                                                                                           | 124.32±10.36                                                                                                          | 52.21±5.26                                                                                                            | 104.42±8.54                                                                                                           | |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       | IC 50 /8                                                                                                              | 59.85±3.22                                                                                                            | 95.90±15.87                                                                                                           | 83.25±16.02                                                                                                           | 103.99±28.81                                                                                                          | 67.67±6.81                                                                                                            | 113.95±11.25                                                                                                          |
 
 a  decrease  was  present  for  dog  spermatozoa  (except carbaryl) .  For  pyrethroids (cypermethrin and flumethrin) this  decrease  in  hyperactivity  in  dog  for  both  drugs  were found as 39.09 and 37.27% compared to untreated control, whereas the most decrease was observed for chlorpyrifos
 
 treatment with a value of 6.37% (Fig. 1) .  A  decrease of VCL, VSL  and  VAP  parameters  was  evident  in  buck  (P&lt;0.05), whereas  no  difference  was  found  in  dog  sperm  (P&lt;0.05). Overall, flumethrin was  found  to  induce  less  effect  on motility parameters compared to cypermethrin (Table 2) .
 | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | Table 3. Effects on the kinetic parameters (LIN, STR and WOB)of pesticides on buck and dog sperm (percent control)   | |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| | %ofControl±SD                                                                                                        | %ofControl±SD                                                                                                        | Linearity                                                                                                            | Linearity                                                                                                            | Straightness                                                                                                         | Straightness                                                                                                         | Wobble                                                                                                               | Wobble                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                      | | (Total = Slow + Medium+Rapid)                                                                                        | (Total = Slow + Medium+Rapid)                                                                                        | Buck                                                                                                                 | Dog                                                                                                                  | Buck                                                                                                                 | Dog                                                                                                                  | Buck                                                                                                                 | Dog                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50                                                                                                                | 72.79±1.43                                                                                                           | 104.37±4.95                                                                                                          | 83.70±1.43                                                                                                           | 95.26±4.65                                                                                                           | 86.97±2.14                                                                                                           | 110.01±0.87                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /2                                                                                                             | 94.64±5.69                                                                                                           | 107.75±22.51                                                                                                         | 93.78±5.69                                                                                                           | 87.14±7.96                                                                                                           | 100.92±3.51                                                                                                          | 124.15±2.33                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /4                                                                                                             | 94.85±5.70                                                                                                           | 76.76±7.29                                                                                                           | 96.73±5.70                                                                                                           | 93.25±14.59                                                                                                          | 97.97±3.62                                                                                                           | 82.65±4.15                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /8                                                                                                             | 96.92±5.83                                                                                                           | 82.05±25.21                                                                                                          | 97.44±5.83                                                                                                           | 86.21±24.73                                                                                                          | 99.56±3.65                                                                                                           | 95.56±8.53                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50                                                                                                                | 119.49±1.42                                                                                                          | 85.32±12.83                                                                                                          | 114.29±1.04                                                                                                          | 96.13±5.46                                                                                                           | 104.56±3.65                                                                                                          | 89.11±8.06                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /2                                                                                                             | 55.99±0.79                                                                                                           | 90.53±48.99                                                                                                          | 66.60±0.57                                                                                                           | 99.00±10.63                                                                                                          | 84.07±3.64                                                                                                           | 91.82±15.94                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /4                                                                                                             | 94.27±8.33                                                                                                           | 84.73±17.51                                                                                                          | 109.77±0.95                                                                                                          | 96.67±20.21                                                                                                          | 85.82±3.72                                                                                                           | 88.01±20.21                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /8                                                                                                             | 87.07±1.23                                                                                                           | 86.75±6.41                                                                                                           | 114.29±0.99                                                                                                          | 92.22±16.64                                                                                                          | 76.24±3.30                                                                                                           | 94.45±11.45                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50                                                                                                                | 89.48±17.53                                                                                                          | 130.41±6.19                                                                                                          | 96.04±2.69                                                                                                           | 115.36±5.63                                                                                                          | 93.16±1.25                                                                                                           | 113.51±0.90                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /2                                                                                                             | 56.98±14.12                                                                                                          | 114.68±29.93                                                                                                         | 52.85±1.42                                                                                                           | 104.57±11.56                                                                                                         | 107.82±1.34                                                                                                          | 110.12±2.13                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /4                                                                                                             | 78.78±8.83                                                                                                           | 146.46±18.49                                                                                                         | 97.20±1.23                                                                                                           | 119.12±27.08                                                                                                         | 81.31±6.01                                                                                                           | 123.45±5.67                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /8                                                                                                             | 102.61±20.21                                                                                                         | 138.96±10.83                                                                                                         | 103.18±3.66                                                                                                          | 110.72±28.95                                                                                                         | 99.94±1.24                                                                                                           | 126.02±15.38                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50                                                                                                                | 87.62±2.85                                                                                                           | 104.50±4.96                                                                                                          | 96.08±18.57                                                                                                          | 89.69±4.37                                                                                                           | 91.20±14.93                                                                                                          | 116.98±0.93                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                      | 105.77±2.41                                                                                                          | 125.80±26.31                                                                                                         | 89.17±13.34                                                                                                          | 105.74±9.09                                                                                                          | 118.61±4.92                                                                                                          | 119.46±2.38                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /2                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                      | 172.52±19.14                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                      | 139.87±7.18                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /4                                                                                                             | 102.26±2.33                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      | 96.68±16.45                                                                                                          | 123.85±22.14                                                                                                         | 105.77±4.39                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50                                                                                                                | 107.83±2.62                                                                                                          | 84.93±5.62                                                                                                           | 109.81±3.76                                                                                                          | 85.38±3.64                                                                                                           | 98.20±10.85                                                                                                          | 99.88±3.49                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /2                                                                                                             | 81.12±1.49                                                                                                           | 86.46±20.49                                                                                                          | 101.32±12.90                                                                                                         | 94.96±6.80                                                                                                           | 80.06±1.27                                                                                                           | 91.4±6.88                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /4                                                                                                             | 117.90±2.17                                                                                                          | 158.49±13.70                                                                                                         | 112.92±3.23                                                                                                          | 116.76±15.60                                                                                                         | 104.30±10.65                                                                                                         | 136.29±20.18                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /8                                                                                                             | 138.06±2.54                                                                                                          | 136.84±79.03                                                                                                         | 118.12±9.38                                                                                                          | 114.68±35.17                                                                                                         | 116.50±1.85                                                                                                          | 119.81±32.09                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50                                                                                                                | 82.83±10.06                                                                                                          | 91.02±13.69                                                                                                          | 89.40±17.44                                                                                                          | 95.16±5.41                                                                                                           | 92.26±3.98                                                                                                           | 96.03±8.68                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /2                                                                                                             | 126.88±5.95                                                                                                          | 110.39±3.73                                                                                                          | 115.27±10.63                                                                                                         | 105.63±11.23                                                                                                         | 110.88±3.85                                                                                                          | 104.94±19.63                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /4                                                                                                             | 133.74±6.27                                                                                                          | 144.51±38.84                                                                                                         | 136.32±12.57                                                                                                         | 119.34±26.35                                                                                                         | 98.64±5.42                                                                                                           | 121.58±21.40                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                      | |                                                                                                                      | IC 50 /8                                                                                                             | 140.60±6.59                                                                                                          | 108.64±17.80                                                                                                         | 125.31±11.56                                                                                                         | 91.48±27.39                                                                                                          | 112.74±8.91                                                                                                          | 119.25±13.20                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                      |
 For  organophosphate  drugs  (chlorpyrifos  and methamidophos), a decrease in VCL, VSL, VAP parameters for both drugs in buck was observed, whereas this decrease was present for only chlorpyrifos in dogs (P&lt;0.05). Propoxur were found to decrease VCL, VSL and VAP values where no difference  was  found  for  carbaryl  (P&gt;0.05).  Even  though the minor changes, in general, the linearity, straightness and wobble values were found to have decreased in buck for  all  treatments  except  chlorpyrifos.  Meanwhile  this difference  were  insignificant  in  most  of  them  and  did  not exert dose correlation (Table 3) .
 ## DISCUSSION
 The species specific differences in sperm morphology including spermatozoon membrane structural composition, ion  channel  distribution  and  oxidative  damage  are  the key  response  elements  for  the  toxic  effects  of  xenobiotics on  spermatozoa.  Phospholipids,  especially  phosphatidylcholine  and  phosphatidylethanolamine, compose the majority  of  lipid  fraction  of  the  sperm  cell  membranes, functioning as a natural barrier for  chemical  and  physical stress defining the functional characteristics of the sperm  . Long-chain  polyunsaturated  fatty  acids  (PUFAs)  in spermatozoa influence the membrane fluidity    can lead to  reduced  membrane  fluidity  and  a  functional  defect  in sperm-oocyte  fusion  and  fertilization  .  As  PUFAs  and docosahexaenoic  acid  (DHA)  are  expected  to  effect  the sperm viability,  motility  and  the  ability  of  spermatozoa to survive cryogenic storage and restores the protection  , species  specific  differences  might  play  an  important role  in  the  xenobiotic  transport  to  sperm;  meanwhile the  alteration  in  the  PUFAs  composition  could  be  the common base  of  different  degenerative  processes  . The  goat  sperm  plasma  membrane  was  found  to  be particularly  rich  in  ether  lipids  phosphatidylcholine  and phosphatidylethanolamine     and  yet  dog  semen  also contained great amounts of PUFA   . This lipid structure of the spermatozoa membrane also effects the the absorption of  the  chemical  into  the  cell  which  is  also  determined by partitioning between aqueous and lipid phases. The octanol/water  partition  coefficient  (log  K ow ),  defining  the ratio  of  the  concentration  of  the  chemical  in  octanol  to the  concentration  of  water,  is  important  in  the  absorption
 of  drugs.  Hydrophobic  drugs  with  high  octanol/water partition  coefficient  are  preferentially  distributed  to  the lipid  bilayers  of  cells  .  In  the  current  study cypermethrin having  the  highest  Log  K ow ,  (6.6)  were  found  to  exert  the lowest  IC 50 in  both  viability  assays;  however,  this  relation (Log Kow of  the  tested  pesticides  are  5.9  for flumethrin ,  -1.74 for methamidophos , 4.7 for chlorpyrifos , 1.45 for propoxur and 2.36 for carbaryl) was not present for the rest of the drugs.
 The  distribution  of  the  ion  channels  in  different species  could  also  implicate  the  toxicity  differences  of the  tested  pesticides.  Amiloride  sensitive  Na + channels contribute  to  the  regulation  of  resting  sperm  membrane potential  ; whereas voltage-dependent  Na +   channels are  required  for  the  regulation  of  mature  sperm  function with an important role in the initial capacitation steps for the  hyperpolarization  before  the  acrosome  reaction  . After capacitation, the sperm cell hyperpolarizes with an increase  in  K + permeability  and  blocking  of  the  epithelial sodium channel. This effect is similar to the mechanism of action of pyrethroids. In the current study, this in vitro effect might have induced a potency on the transmembrane ion channels;  where  an  increase  in  the  overall  hyperactivity  is evident. On the other hand, the sperm activates the oocyte by  causing  either  a  single  or  series  of  Ca 2+ oscillations  and T-type  Ca 2+   channels  are  the  key  components  in  male reproduction, such as in the acrosome reaction and sperm motility  .  The  influence on the voltage independent Ca 2+ influx,  especially  from  the  extracellular  environment  such like  the  conditions in our experiment are utilized during fertilization  and  might  initiate  a  false  acrosome  reaction making the cells more hyperactive.
 Acrosome  contains  hydrolytic  enzymes  like  acrosin, hyaluronidase  and  many  other  hydrolases  and  esterases including  acetylcholine  esterase  and  acetylcholine transferase  .  Also  several  reports  suggest  that  nACh receptors (α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor) are present in mammalian sperm which is involved in the zona pellucidainduced  acrosome  reaction  along  with  increased  intracellular calcium levels  . As well known, organophosphorus compounds (OPs) and carbamates bind to an active site of acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  and  inhibit  the  functionality of  this  enzyme.  In  the  current  study,  OPs  increased the  hyperactivity  in  buck  and  decrease  in  dog;  where carbamates increased hyperactivity in both species; which might also be attributed to the species specific differences in the nACh receptor expression.
 Another  key  factor;  free-radical  induced  oxidative damage to mitochondrial membrane lowers the production of  ATP  ultimately  affecting  the  motility  and  it  has deleterious  effects  on  sperm  plasma  membrane  and  DNA damage   . In the study by Zalata et al.  in vitro effects of cypermethrin on  human  spermatozoa  were  investigated; where cypermethrin was  demonstrated to preferentially get localized in the hydrophobic core of the membrane, increasing the lipid packing and decreasing the membrane fluidity.  It  was  concluded  that, cypermethrin produced oxidative  stress  by  generating  reactive  oxygen  species (ROS) and reducing the antioxidant defenses. Although high  concentrations  of  ROS  cause  sperm  pathologies resulting  in  a  loss  of  sperm  motility  and  viability,  low concentrations  play  an  important  role  in  capacitation, hyperactivation,  acrosome  reaction  and  sperm-oocyte fusion  .  This  might  explain current study findings; where cypermethrin was  found  to  be  highly  toxic  compared to  other  pesticides in  vitro .  In  buck,  the  toxic  effect  of cypermethrin in  the  current  study,  was  more  evident  with an  increased  hyperactivity  and  a  possible  loss  of  ATP  and death compared to dog.
 Since  motility  of  the  spermatozoon  depends  on  the energy expense produced in mitochondria   ;  MTT  results in  the  current  study,  indicating  the  mitochondrial  function, with  lower  IC 50 values  reveal  that  pesticides  altered  the mitochondrial  functions,  with  an  over  increase  of  hyperactivity leading to cell death. MTT method, is efficient in processing  a  large  number  of  specimens  and  therefore may be a powerful tool for preliminary screening of toxic compounds  in  spermatozoa.  Neutral  red  assay,  for  the lysosomal  activity,  could  also  be  used  as  a  supportive quantitative-colorimetric  method  for  the  viability  assays along  with  MTT  and  not  only  for  the  microscopic  analysis for  the  acrosome  reaction  .  As  CASA  variables  unfolds the  important  indicators  for  the  fertilization  capability  of spermatozoa such as motility; it is expected to provide as prognostic  tool  for in  vitro toxicity  assays  along  with  the viability  quantitative  such as MTT and NR for the potential screening  of  xenobiotics in  vitro .  The  combination  of these  protocols  would  provide  cheap,  repeatable  results where  many  samples  are  screened  in  a  very  short  time. Even  though  these in  vitro models  represent  only  a  very simplified picture of reality which encompasses only a small part  of  the  complex  reproductive  cycle  and  has  its  own limitations;  it  is  required  especially  for  the  reproductive toxicity  battery  assays  for  the  cosmetic  products  testing where in  vivo studies  are  no  longer  allowed.  Researchers should  also  include  the  species  specific  differences  for their  decisions  using  these  simplified in  vitro sperm toxicity assays.
 ## REFERENCES
 1.  Comhaire F, Mahmoud A, Zalata A, Dhooge W: Factors  affecting male  fertility. In, De Vriese  DR,  Christophe  AB  (Eds):  Male  Fertility  and Lipid Metabolism. 1-10. AOCS Publishing, Champaign, IL, 2003.
2. Knez K: Endocrine-disrupting chemicals and male reproductive health. Reprod Biomed Online, 26, 440-448, 2013. DOI: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2013.02.005 3. Lorenzetti S, Altieri I, Arabi S, Balduzzi D, Bechi N, Cordelli E, Galli C, Ietta F, Modina SC, Narciso L, Pacchierotti F, Villani P , Galli A, Lazzari G,  Luciano  AM,  Paulesu  L,  Spanò  M,  Mantovani  A: Innovative  nonanimal  testing  strategies  for  reproductive  toxicology: The  contribution of  Italian  partners  within  the  EU  project  ReProTect. Ann  Ist  Super  Sanita, 47, 429-444, 2011. DOI: 10.4415/ANN\_11\_04\_16 4.  Peiris  LD,  Moore  HD: Evaluation  of  effects  of  1,3-dinitrobenzene on  sperm  motility  of  hamster  using  computer  assisted  semen  analysis
 (CASA). Asian J Androl , 3 (2): 109-114, 2001.
 5. Ohtani K, Yamazaki S, Kubota H, Miyagawa M, Saegusa J: Comparative investigation  of  several  sperm  analysis  methods  for  evaluation  of spermatotoxicity  of  industrial  chemical:  2-bromopropane  as  an  example. Ind Health, 42, 219-225, 2004. DOI: 10.2486/indhealth.42.219 6.  Yurdakok  B, Tekin  K,  Daskin  A,  Filazi  A: Effects  of  polychlorinated biphenyls  28,  30  and  118  on  bovine  spermatozoa in  vitro. Reprod  Dom Anim, 50, 41-47, 2015. DOI: 10.1111/rda.12447 7.  Mosmann T: Rapid  colorimetric  assay  for  cellular  growth  and  survival: application  to  proliferation  and  cytotoxicity  assays. J  Immunol  Methods, 65, 55-63, 1983. DOI: 10.1016/0022-1759(83)90303-4 8.  Repetto G, del Peso A, Zurita JL: Neutral  red  uptake  assay  for  the estimation  of  cell  viability/cytotoxicity. Nat  Protoc, 3,  1125-1131,  2008. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2008.75 9.  Mandal  DK,  Kumar  M,  Tyagi  S: Effect  of  age  on  spermiogram  of Holstein Friesian × Sahiwal crossbred bulls. Animal, 4,  595-603, 2010. DOI: 10.1017/S1751731109991273 10.  Martinez-Soto  JC,  Landeras  J,  Gadea  J: Spermatozoa  and  seminal plasma  fatty  acids  as  predictors  of  cryopreservation  success. Andrology , 1, 365-375, 2013. DOI: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2012.00040.x 11.  Safarinejad  MR: Effect  of  omega-3  polyunsaturated  fatty  acid supplementation on semen profile and enzymatic anti-oxidant capacity of  seminal  plasma  in  infertile  men  with  idiopathic  oligoasthenoteratospermia:  A  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  randomised  study. Andrologia 43, 38-47, 2011. DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0272.2009.01013.x 12. Gavazza M, Guttiérez AM, Marmunti M, Palacios A: Lipid peroxidase assays in canine fresh semen. Rev Vet, 20 (2): 97-102, 2009.
13.  Rana  AP ,  Majumder  GC,  Misra  S,  Ghosh  A: Lipid  changes  of  goat sperm plasma membrane during epididymal maturation. Biochim Biophys Acta, 1061, 185-196, 1991. DOI: 10.1016/0005-2736(91)90284-F 14. Avdeef A: Octanol-Water Partitioning. In, Avdeef A (Ed): Absorption and Drug Development: Solubility, Permeability, and Charge State, 2 nd  edn., 11. 174-219, John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA. 2012.
15.  Hernández-González  EO,  Sosnik  J,  Edwards  J,  Acevedo  JJ, Mendoza-Lujambio  I,  López-González  I,  Demarco  I,  Wertheimer E,  Darszon  A,  Visconti  PE: Sodium  and  epithelial  sodium  channels participate  in  the  regulation  of  the  capacitation-associated  hyperpolarization  in  mouse  sperm. J  Biol  Chem, 281,  5623-5633,  2006.  DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M508172200 16.  Pinto  FM,  Ravina  CG,  Fernández-Sánchez  M,  Gallardo-Castro  M, Cejudo-Román A, Candenas L: Molecular and functional characterization of  voltage-gated  sodium  channels  in  human  sperm. Reprod  Biol Endocrinol, 7, 71, 2009. DOI: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-71 17. Tao J, Zhang Y, Li S, Sun W, Soong TW: Tyrosine kinase-independent inhibition  by  genistein  on  spermatogenic  T-type  calcium  channels attenuates  mouse  sperm  motility  and  acrosome  reaction. Cell  Calcium, 45, 133-143, 2009. DOI: 10.1016/j.ceca.2008.07.004 18.  Pesch  S,  Bergmann  M: Structure  of  mammalian  spermatozoa  in respect  to  viability,  fertility  and  cryopreservation. Micron, 37,  597-612, 2006. DOI: 10.1016/j.micron.2006.02.006 19.  Jaldety Y ,  Glick Y ,  Orr-Urtreger  A,  Ickowicz  D,  Gerber  D,  Breitbart H: Sperm  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor  (EGFR)  mediates  α7 acetylcholine  receptor  (AChR)  activation  to  promote  fertilization. J  Biol Chem, 287, 22328-22340, 2012. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.292292 20. Agarwal A, Virk G, Ong C, du Plessis S: Effect of oxidative stress on male  reproduction. World J  Mens  Health, 32,  1-17,  2014.  DOI:  10.5534/ wjmh.2014.32.1.1 21.  Zalata  A,  Elhanbly  S,  Abdalla  H,  Serria  MS,  Aziz  A,  El-Dakrooy SA, El-Bakary AA, Mostafa T: In vitro study  of  cypermethrin on human spermatozoa  and  the  possible  protectiverole  of  vitamins  C  and  E. Andrologia, 46, 1141-1147, 2014. DOI: 10.1111/and.12206 22.  Jankovicova  J,  Simon  M,  Antalikova  J: Methods  for  evaluation  of an  acrosome  reaction  of  bovine  spermatozoa. Acta  Fytotechn  Zootechn, 1, 118-119, 2006.