
 ## Effects of chlorpyrifos-methyl, chlormequat, deltamethrin, glyphosate, pirimiphos-methyl, tebuconazole and their mixture on oxidative stress and toxicity in HUVEC cell line
 
 Ç/idotaccentğdem Sev/idotaccentm 1 , Al/idotaccent T agh/idotaccentzadehghalehjough/idotaccent 2 , Mehtap Kara 3
 
 
 1 Kastamonu University, Faculty of Medicine, , Deparment of Medical Pharmacology, Kastamonu, Turkey 2 Ataturk University, Faculty of Veterinary, Deparment of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Erzurum, Turkey 3 Istanbul University, Faculty of Pharmacy, Deparment of Pharmaceutical Toxicology, Istanbul,Turkey
 ORCID IDs of the authors: Ç.S. 0000-0002-0575-3090; A.T. 0000-0002-3506-0324; M.K. 0000-0001-7764-5593
 Cite  this  article  as: Sevim,  C.,  Taghizadehghalehjoughi,  A.,  &amp;  Kara,  M.  .  Effects  of  chlorpyrifos-methyl,  chlormequat, deltamethrin, glyphosate, pirimiphos-methyl, tebuconazole and their mixture on oxidative stress and toxicity in HUVEC cell line. İstanbul Journal of Pharmacy, 51 (2), 183-190.
 ## ABSTRACT
 Background and Aims: Humans and animals have daily contact with various chemicals, including food additives, pesticides, antibiotics, other veterinary drugs, and other xenobiotics. Pesticide exposure causes many health disorders. Mixed exposure to pesticides is an important issue for human and environmental health.
 Methods: In this study, we have determined the cytotoxicity of chlormequat pirimiphos-methyl, glyphosate, tebuconazole, chlorpyrifos-methyl,  deltamethrin,  and  the  mixture  of  these  six  pesticides.  We  further  investigated  the  role  of  oxidative stress, total oxidant status (TOS), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and antioxidant defense mechanism TOS, total glutathione (GSH) levels with the observed cytotoxicity.
 Results: In this study, the mixtures of pesticides reduced total antioxidant status (TAS) and GSH level one by one and increased the reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in HUVECs, respectively. The results also showed a significant contribution of oxidative stress on cytotoxicity during pesticide mixture exposure.
 Conclusion: The findings are that pesticide mixture exposure might have an impact on human health risk at contaminated sites and under occupational exposure conditions.
 Keywords: Chlorpyrifos-methyl, chlormequat, deltamethrin, glyphosate, pirimiphos-methyl, tebuconazole, oxidative stress, HUVECs
 ## INTRODUCTION
 Pesticides  are  commonly  used  compounds  in  farming  that have a wide range of classes, such as insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, nematicides, acaricides, rodenticides, avicides, wood preservatives, and antifoulants. A remarkable amount of these pesticides spreads into the environment and this brings about immunotoxicity, carcinogenesis, and endocrine and developmental toxicity. Authorities such EFSA, EPA, and the Food, Drug,
 Mehtap KARA, e-mail: mehtap.kara@istanbul.edu.tr and Cosmetic Act, attaches importance to assessing pesticide compound mixture effects on the environment and living organisms . Risk assessment of pesticide mixture is a highly important issue due to environmental and human exposure. People are always exposed to pesticide combinations due to protective strategies against pests in farms in farming. However, there is still no strict rule for risk assessment of pesticide compound mixture. Different combination risk assessment models
 
 Submitted: 16.02.2021 Revision Requested: 17.04.2021 Last Revision Received: 30.04.2021 Accepted: 09.05.2021
 can be seen in the literature. The most common risk assessment model is the dose addition model found in the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) guidelines .
 Conazole  fungicides  are  widely  used  for  agriculture  and  also treatment of mycosis and candida infections in humans and animals. Conazole fungicides cause disarrangement of fungal membranes  via  inhibition  of  cytochrome  P450  enzyme  lanosterol 14α-demethylase (CYP51). CYP51 is one of the main elements of ergosterol biosynthesis and normal fungal membrane integrity. Canozole fungicides have side effects such as endocrine disruption. These compounds exert their endocrine disrupting effects via CYP51 and CYP19 inhibition, which play a significant role as steroidogenic enzymes . Tebuconazole is a widely used fungicide that has a sterol demethylation inhibitor effect. It has been reported that the Tebuconazole plasma half-life is approximately 600 days, and it causes toxic effects on the thyroid, liver, nervous system, and reproductive organs. In addition, it also exposes developmental and genetic toxicity .
 Chlormequat  chloride  is  a  quaternary  ammonium  compound which is used for floriculture as a plant growth regulator by reducing longitudinal shoot growth effect . Exposure to human beings is quite common. According to WHO, chlormequat is excreted 98% invariably and its acceptable daily intake (ADI) level is  0.05  mg/kg.bw. It is  totally  eliminated  from  the  body within 46 h. It is important to investigate the potential toxic effects of chlormequat on cellular mechanisms due to the wide range of species that are exposed to it . Organophosphorus pesticides (OP) are the most common pesticide type used worldwide. OPs are absorbed via inhalation, skin, eyes, and ingestion. The main acute toxic effect is inhibition of the acetylcholinesterase enzyme, which results in a cholinergic crisis. Pirimiphos-methyl belongs to the OP group of pesticides, which  are  non-cumulative  and  broad  spectrum  compounds. Even  though  pirimiphos-methyl  is  classified  as 'no  reprotoxin, no teratogen' by OECD, its harmful effects on development and on the reproductive and immune systems have been shown in studies . Glyphosate is a non - selective organophosphorus herbicide and it has bioaccumulation potential in the environment. Glyphosate exposure causes toxic effects in mammalians by increasing oxidative stress levels. Due to its common usage, this pesticide residue can be found in food and environmental samples. The main toxicity mechanism of glyphosate increases the emergence of ROS and causes disruption on cellular macromolecules by ROS . Chlorpyrifos is another widely used broad-spectrum organophosphorus insecticide. It has been reported that chlorpyrifos might have some toxic effects on organs and systems. Its common toxic effect is on the nervous system by  acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  inhibition.  Its  main  toxic  effect mechanism is associated with cellular oxidative stress increment . Deltamethrin is part of the potent pyrethroid class of insecticides and acaricides. Also, deltamethrin has been used for controlling human diseases caused by mosquitos that are vectors of Zika virus and Dengue virus. It has been reported that deltamethrin exerts its toxic effects by increasing cellular ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS). Oxidative stress remarkably increases the deltamethrin toxicity mechanism .
 Oxidative  stress  is  a  cellular  imbalance  condition  which  is formed between free radical production and the antioxidant defense  system.  Several  chemicals  may  cause  free  radical production and through this, these radicals interact with important cellular molecules and impair their functions pathologically  . Pesticide exposure may cause reactive oxygen species production in the cell that exceeds antioxidant defenses system. The cellular antioxidant system includes several molecules and enzymes, including reduced glutathione (GSH), non-protein thiols,  catalase  (CAT),  glutathione-S-transferases (GST), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and glutathione reductase (GR) . The pesticide-induced oxidative stress molecular mechanism has still not been clarified and is under scrutiny by scientists seeking to evaluate risk factors and understand related pathologic diseases .
 There are limited studies in the literature  for  these  six  pesticides'  effects  on  cellular  oxidative  stress  in  endothelial  cells. HUVECs are cell models that are frequently used to investigate the underlying mechanisms of endothelial diseases  In this study, we have evaluated the toxicity of singly and mixture In this study, we have evaluated the toxicity of  chlorpyrifos-methyl,  chlormequat,  deltamethrin,  glyphosate, pirimiphos-methyl, tebuconazole singly and as a mixture. Further  oxidative  stress-inducing  potential  was  evaluated  in HUVECs. This is the first study of the effects of this pesticide mixture on HUVECs.
 ## MATERIALS AND METHODS
 ## Cell culture and cell viability assays
 The Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial (HUVEC) cell line was provided from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC® PCS100-010™). Cells were grown in RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, Uxbridge, UK) including 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, Uxbridge, UK), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (GIBCO, Uxbridge, UK), with incubation conditions of 37°C and a humidified  atmosphere  with  5%  CO 2 .  Cell  passage  was  performed with  0.025%  trypsin-0.02%  EDTA  after  cell  co-fluency.  Cells passage was performed twice a week. HUVEC cells are a sufficient model for investigating the molecular mechanisms of cardiovascular  diseases  under  different  chemical  exposure conditions .
 Chlormequat chloride, pirimiphos-pethyl, glyphosate, tebuconazole, chlorpyrifos-methyl, deltamethrin, and their mixture's effects  on  the  HUVECs  viability  were  assessed  by  MTT  test, which depends on measuring the reduction of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium  bromide  (MTT)  compound to formazan by the mitochondrial enzyme succinate dehydrogenase. After a 24 h exposure duration, cells were incubated with MTT for 3 h at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere (95%) with 5% CO 2 . After incubation, cell media was discarded,
 100 µL DMSO was added into each well, and absorbance of formazan compound was measured with spectrophotometry (Epoch, Biotek) at a wavelength of 595 nm. Pesticide exposure concentrations are shown in Table 1 .
 Table 1. Pesticide exposure concentrations for cell viability assay.
 | Pesticide            | Concentrations(mM)   | |----------------------|----------------------| | Chlormequat chloride | 25, 50, 100 and 200  | | Pirimiphos-Methyl    | 25, 50, 100 and 200  | | Glyphosate           | 25, 50, 100 and 200  | | Potassium            |                      | | Tebuconazole         | 25, 50, 100 and 200  | | Chlorpyrifos-methyl  | 25, 50, 100 and 200  | | Deltamethrin         | 2.5, 5, 10 and 20    | | Mix                  | 50 and 200           |
 ## Oxidative stress quantification assays
 Lactat Dehydrogenase (LDH) Assay :  LDH assay was performed with an LDH assay kit (ab102526-abcam). This assay was based on quantifying LDH activity via reducing NAD to NADH, then NADH interacts with a specific kit reagent that produces a color which can be detected at 450 nm. Cell lysates were mixed with reaction reagent and the colored sample was read at 450 nm with a spectrophotometer (Epoch, Biotek).
 Total Antioxidant Status (TAS): TAS assay was performed via a TAS reagent kit (Rel Assay Diagnostics - Turkey) through the manufacturer's service bulletin. This assay was based on antioxidants reducing  kit  ABST  component,  and  the  absorbance  change was detected by spectrophotometer at 660 nm. The assay is calibrated via trolox equivalent. Cell lysates and standards were mixed with reagent 1 and this mixture was measured spectrophotometrically. After reagent 2 was added into the mixture, the measurement was done at 5 min interval at 660 nm.
 Total Oxidant Status (TOS): TOS assay was performed by TOS a Reagent kit (Rel Assay Diagnostics - Turkey) with the manufacturer's instruction. This assay was based on oxidants in the sample  which  oxidize  the  ferrous  ions.  Oxidized  ferric  ions make a colored complex that can be measured by spectrophotometer at 530 nm. The assay is calibrated via hydrogen peroxide. Cell lysates and standards were mixed with reagent 1 and the first spectrophotometric measurement wasdone with 530 nm. Then reagent 2 was added into the mixture and absorbance measurement was was done at 5 minutes interval.
 Total Glutathione (GSH) Assay: GSH assay was performed by Glutathione Detection Assay Kit (Fluorometric) (Abcam-ab65322). This kit detects both reduced and oxidized glutathione. This assay is based on monochlorobimane (MCB), which is adducted with GSH that is catalyzed by GST. Bound MCB creates fluorescent blue light (Ex/Em=380/461 nm), which is detected by fluorometer (CARY ECLIPSE - USA).
 ## RESULTS
 ## Cell viability
 According to MTT assay results, IC 50 values of  five  pesticides and their combination exposure effects have been listed in Table 2 (Figure 1). 50 and 200 mM concentrations of each pesti-
 Figure 1. Cell viability assay graphs of six pesticided and their combination at 50 and 100 mM concentrations. IC 50 values of each pesticide were calculated via graphs slope formulation.
 | Table 2. IC 50 values of pesticides accordingtoMTT results.   | Table 2. IC 50 values of pesticides accordingtoMTT results.   | |---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------| | Pesticide                                                     | IC 50 value(mM)                                               | | Chlorpyrifos-methyl                                           | 51.836                                                        | | Pirimiphos-Methyl                                             | 52.729                                                        | | Glyphosate                                                    | 151.198                                                       | | Chlormequat Chloride                                          | 54.232                                                        | | Tebuconazole                                                  | 25.837                                                        | | Deltamethrin                                                  | 8.567                                                         | | Mix 50 and mix 200                                            | 38.060                                                        |
 
 cide were chosen for combination exposure. For LDH, TAS, TOS and GSH assays 25, 50, 100 and 200 mM concentrations were chosen for 24 h exposure. We used concentrations that were above the IC 50 values to compare higher concentration effects on oxidative stress parameters.
 ## LDH assay
 LDH  values  significantly  decreased  at  25  mM  concentration for  all  six  pesticides  compared  to  the  control  group.  Chlormequat chloride exposure to all experimental concentrations decreased LDH level. Increased LDH levels were observed in higher  concentrations  of  chlorpyrifos-methylp  and  pirimiphos-methyl groups. 50 and 200 mM mix groups showed a significant  decrease  in  LDH  levels  compared  to  the  control group (Figure 2). LDH levels after pesticide exposure are shown in Table 3.
 Figure  2. LDH  assay  results  of  six  pesticides.  *p&lt;0,05;  **p&lt;0,001. CM: Chlorpyrifos-methyl, PM: Pirimiphos-Methyl, GP: Glyphosate, C: Chlormequat Chloride, D: Deltamethrin, T: Tebuconazole.
 
 ## Total antioxidant status
 TAS  levels  decreased  in  concentration  dependent,  but  not significantly in the chlorpyrifos-methyl group. TAS levels decreased in pthe pirimiphos-methyl and deltamethrin groups. TAS  levels  decreased  in  the  glyphosate,  chlormequat  chloride,  and  tebuconazole  groups  only  in  25  and  200  mM  exposure concentrations compared to the control group. TAS levels  decreased in mixed groups compared to the control group  (Figure  3).  TAS  levels  after  pesticide  exposure  are shown in Table 3.
 Figure  3. TAS  assay  results  of  six  pesticides.  *p&lt;0,05;  **p&lt;0,001. CM: Chlorpyrifos-methyl, PM: Pirimiphos-Methyl, GP: Glyphosate, C: Chlormequat Chloride, D: Deltamethrin, T: Tebuconazole.
 
 ## Total oxidant status
 TOS levels increased significantly in pthe pirimiphos-m, glyphosate, chlormequat chloride, deltamethrin, and tebuconazole single exposures and in the mixture exposure compared to the control group (Figure 4). TOS levels after pesticide exposure are shown in Table 3.
 
 Control25mM50mM100mM200mM
 Figure  4. TOS  assay  results  of  six  pesticides.  *p&lt;0,05;  **p&lt;0,001. CM: Chlorpyrifos-methyl, PM: Pirimiphos-Methyl, GP: Glyphosate, C: Chlormequat Chloride, D: Deltamethrin, T: Tebuconazole.
 ## Glutathione levels
 GSH  levels  decreased  in  all  exposure  concentrations  significantly  in  the  chlormequat  chloride,  deltamethrin,  tebuconazole, and mix groups. In the glyphosate group 50, 100, and 200  mM  concentrations,  GSH  levels  decreased  significantly compared  to  the  control  group.  In  pthe  Pirimiphos-methyl 100 and 200 mM concentrations, GSH levels decreased significantly compared to the control group. However, for the 25 mM group, GSH level increased dramatically. For the chlorpyrifosmethyl group 100 and 200 mM concentrations, GSH levels decreased significantly compared to the control group (Figure 5). GSH levels after pesticide exposure are shown in Table 3.
 Figure  5. GSH  assay  results  of  six  pesticides.  *p&lt;0,05;  **p&lt;0,001. CM: Chlorpyrifos-methyl, PM: Pirimiphos-Methyl, GP: Glyphosate, C: Chlormequat Chloride, D: Deltamethrin, T: Tebuconazole.
 
 ## DISCUSSION
 Pesticides  are  commonly  used  chemicals  that  protect  agricultural products from weeds, insects, fungus, and rodents. However,  pesticides  are  mostly  toxic  for  the  environment and living organisms. Also, pesticides are commonly used for controlling malaria and dengue disease vectors and controlling plant growth in public places, such as parks and gardens,
 | Pesticides               | LDH(%)                   | TAS (mmolTrolox eq/L)    | TOS (µmolH 2 O 2 eq/L)   | GSH (%for control group)   | |--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------| | Control                  | 100                      | 5.4±0.1                  | 2.4±0.1                  | 100                        | | Chlormequat chloride(mM) | Chlormequat chloride(mM) | Chlormequat chloride(mM) | Chlormequat chloride(mM) | Chlormequat chloride(mM)   | | 25                       | 65.1                     | 2.4±0.1                  | 5.1±0.2                  | 48.4                       | | 50                       | 62.2                     | 4.5±0.2                  | 3.2±0.2                  | 40.3                       | | 100                      | 65.1                     | 3.6±0.2                  | 3.7±0.1                  | 37.6                       | | 200                      | 61                       | 2.5±0.1                  | 4.5±0.1                  | 30.7                       | | Pirimiphos-Methyl(mM)    | Pirimiphos-Methyl(mM)    | Pirimiphos-Methyl(mM)    | Pirimiphos-Methyl(mM)    | Pirimiphos-Methyl(mM)      | | 25                       | 63.6                     | 2.8±0.1                  | 4.3±0.1                  | 100.5                      | | 50                       | 70.6                     | 3.3±0.2                  | 3.6±0.1                  | 100.3                      | | 100                      | 116.8                    | 2.3±0.2                  | 4.4±0.05                 | 56.6                       | | 200                      | 140.1                    | 2.1±0.3                  | 5.1±0.2                  | 40                         | | Glyphosate Potassium(mM) | Glyphosate Potassium(mM) | Glyphosate Potassium(mM) | Glyphosate Potassium(mM) | Glyphosate Potassium(mM)   | | 25                       | 76.2                     | 1.5±0.2                  | 5.5±0.1                  | 90.3                       | | 50                       | 87.4                     | 4.7±0.2                  | 2.7±0.1                  | 66.5                       | | 100                      | 87.5                     | 3.6±0.3                  | 3.5±0.2                  | 37.3                       | | 200                      | 93                       | 2.8±0.1                  | 4.7±0.1                  | 36.5                       | | Tebuconazole(mM)         | Tebuconazole(mM)         | Tebuconazole(mM)         | Tebuconazole(mM)         | Tebuconazole(mM)           | | 25                       | 66.4                     | 1.5±0.1                  | 4.9±0.1                  | 53.8                       | | 50                       | 66.5                     | 4.9±0.2                  | 3.1±0.1                  | 45.3                       | | 100                      | 73.4                     | 3.7±3.5                  | 3.8±0.2                  | 37.6                       | | 200                      | 90.9                     | 2.6±0.2                  | 4.4±0.2                  | 36.9                       | | Chlorpyrifos-methyl(mM)  | Chlorpyrifos-methyl(mM)  | Chlorpyrifos-methyl(mM)  | Chlorpyrifos-methyl(mM)  | Chlorpyrifos-methyl(mM)    | | 25                       | 61.5                     | 4.6±0.1                  | 2.8±0.2                  | 81.1                       | | 50                       | 70.6                     | 4.2±0.3                  | 2.9±0.2                  | 93.8                       | | 100                      | 93                       | 4.1±0.3                  | 3.1±0.1                  | 35.7                       | | 200                      | 170.1                    | 3.7±0.4                  | 3.5±0.1                  | 33.8                       | | Deltamethrin(mM)         | Deltamethrin(mM)         | Deltamethrin(mM)         | Deltamethrin(mM)         | Deltamethrin(mM)           | | 2.5                      | 60.1                     | 1.8±0.1                  | 5.4±0.1                  | 59.2                       | | 5                        | 64.3                     | 3.8±0.1                  | 3.4±0.1                  | 48.8                       | | 10                       | 93.7                     | 1.9±0.1                  | 4.7±0.1                  | 41.9                       | | 20                       | 100                      | 1.5±0.1                  | 4.4±0.2                  | 37.7                       | | Mix 50                   | 66.4                     | 1.4±0.1                  | 5.9±0.1                  | 33.8                       | | Mix 200                  | 59.4                     | 1.3±0.1                  | 6.1±0.1                  | 25.3                       |
 which trigger important risk factors for public health. Pesticide exposure has different acute and chronic effects, including  cancer,  asthma,  diabetes,  and  neurodegeneration  . One of the main mechanisms underlying reasons of pesticide toxicity is oxidative stress. Pesticides have  induced  oxidative  stress  mechanisms  in  relation  with diseases, and this is still a question of debate. Oxidative stress is  a  cellular  homeostatic imbalance between ROS and antioxidants. While ROS increases in the cell, ROS products interact with important cellular molecules and cause detrimental effects in the cell that bring about several different diseases. Antioxidants are very important cellular soldiers against ROS products. There are several different studies on the oxidative stress induction effects of pesticides in the literature .
 In our study, we have investigated the cytotoxicity and oxidative  stress  inducing  effects  of  six  different  pesticides  (chlorpyrifos-methyl,  pirimiphos-methyl,  glyphosate,  chlormequat chloride,  deltamethrin,  and  tebuconazole)  and  the  exposure of the mixture of them on the HUVEC cell line. HUVECs are very important for analyzing endothelial markers and representing vascular physiology in vitro . It is a general model for endothelial cells with normal and pathological condition analyses. The HUVEC cell line is a good choice for analyzing xenobiotic toxic effects .
 It has been reported that LDH levels increase during oxidative stress induction in the cells . According to our results, LDH levels decrease in a lower concentration (25 mM) in all pesticide groups. LDH levels significantly decrease in all chlormequat chloride concentrations. Increased LDH levels are observed in a higher concentration of chlorpyrifos-methyl and  pirimiphos-methyl  groups.  The  increased  LDH  level  of higher concentrations is associated with why these concentrations have exceeded IC 50 values. Decreased LDH levels are observed significantly in 50 and 200 mM mix groups compared to the control group. In this study, TAS levels decrease and TOS levels increase in all groups, and this is balanced in itself. This is the first study to demonstrate chlormequat cloride effects on LDH levels and oxidative stress. It has been demonstrated that chlorpyrifos-methyl, pirimiphos-methyl, glyphosate, chlormequat  chloride,  deltamethrin,  and  tebuconazole  increased LDH  and  oxidative  stress  levels  in  different  studies  , and our result is in accordance with previous studies.
 In our study, GSH levels significantly decreased concentration dependent for all exposure concentrations in the chlormequat chloride, deltamethrin, tebuconazole, and mixture groups. In the glyphosate group of 50, 100 and 200 mM concentrations, GSH  levels  decreased  significantly  compared  to  the  control group. In pirimiphos-methyl 100 and 200 mM concentrations, GSH  levels  decreased  significantly  compared  to  the  control group. For chlorpyrifos-methyl group 100 and 200 mM concentrations,  GSH  levels  decreased  significantly  compared  to the control group. This is the first study showing chlormequat chloride and Tebuconazole's effects on GSH level. This study is done in accordance with previous studies on decreasing GSH in  the  literature  for  deltamethrin  .
 In  conclusion,  living  organisms  always  encounter  different types of pesticides and their combination in daily life through different  exposure  pathways.  It  is  very  important  to  clarify their  toxic  effect  mechanisms  and  relations  with  diseases  to make  effective  risk  assessments  and  set  regulations  based on this information. Endothelial cells situate in the first phase of  exposure to xenobiotics, and they are affected more. This study  has  confirmed  that  the  oxidative  stress  inducing  effects  of  exposure  to  different  types  of  pesticides  and  their mixture  (chlorpyrifos-methyl,  pirimiphos-methyl,  glyphosate, chlormequat chloride, deltamethrin, tand tebuconazole) and reducing antioxidant capacity of the cells. Further in vitro and in vivo studies need to clarify molecular interactions between pesticide inducing oxidative stress and endothelial cell related diseases. When these mechanisms are understood, protective and therapeutic strategies for the treatment of pesticide exposure's toxic effects can be developed.
 Peer-review: Externally peer-reviewed.
 Author  contributions: Conception/Design  of  Study-  Ç.S.;  Data  Acquisition- A.T.; Data Analysis/Interpretation-M.K.; Drafting ManuscriptM.K.; Critical Revision of Manuscript-Ç.S.; Final Approval and Accountability- Ç.S., A.T., M.K.
 Conflict of Interest: The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
 Financial Disclosure: This study was supported by Ataturk University Scientific Research Projects Fund .
 ## REFERENCES
 - Abdel-Daim, M., El-Bialy, B. E., Rahman, H. G., Radi, A. M., Hefny, H. A., &amp; Hassan, A. M. . Antagonistic effects of Spirulina platensis against sub-acute deltamethrin toxicity in mice: Biochemical and histopathological studies. Biomedicine &amp; Pharmacotherapy= Biomedecine &amp; Pharmacotherapie , 77 , 79-85.
- Abdollahi, M., Ranjbar, A., Shadnia, S., Nikfar, S., &amp; Rezaie, A. . Pesticides  and  oxidative  stress:  a  review. Medical Science Monitor:  International Medical Journal of Experimental and Clinical Research , 10 (6), RA141-RA147.
- Agrawal,  A.,  &amp;  Sharma,  B.,  .  Pesticides  induced  oxidative stress  in  mammalian  systems. International Journal of Biological and Medical Research , 1 (3), 90-104.
- Anogwih, J. A. . Toxicity of pirimiphos methyl (Actellic 25EC) on Anopheles gambiae s.s., Culex quinquefasciatus (Diptera: Culicidae), and potential biocontrol agent, Poecilia reticulata (Pisces: Poeciliidae). Journal of Economic Entomology , 107 (4), 1440-1446.
- Bagherpour  Shamloo,  H.,  Golkari,  S.,  Faghfoori,  Z.,  Movassaghpour,  A.,  Lotfi,  H.,  Barzegari,  A.,  &amp;  Yari  Khosroushahi,  A.  . Lactobacillus  Casei  Decreases  Organophosphorus  Pesticide  Diazinon Cytotoxicity in Human HUVEC Cell Line. Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin , 6 (2), 201-210.
 - Banaee, M., Akhlaghi, M., Soltanian, S., Gholamhosseini, A., Heidarieh, H., &amp; Fereidouni, M. S. . 'Acute exposure to chlorpyrifos and  glyphosate  induces  changes  in  hemolymph  biochemical parameters  in  the  crayfish,  Astacus  leptodactylus  (Eschscholtz, 1823)'. Comparative  Biochemistry  and  Physiology.  Toxicology  &amp; Pharmacology, 222 , 145-155.
- Ben Othmène, Y., Hamdi, H., Annabi, E., Amara, I., Ben Salem, I., Neffati,  F.,  Najjar,  M.  F.,  Abid-Essefi,  S.  .  Tebuconazole  induced cardiotoxicity in male adult rat. Food and chemical toxicology A n International Journal Published for the British Industrial Biological Research Association , 137 , 111134.
- Benachour,  N.,  &amp;  Séralini,  G.  E.  .  Glyphosate  formulations induce apoptosis and necrosis in human umbilical, embryonic, and placental cells. Chemical Research in Toxicology , 22 (1), 97-105.
- Berrouague, S., Rouag, M., Khaldi, T., Boumendjel, A., Boumendjel, M., Taibi, F ., &amp; Messarah, M. . Efficacy of Allium sativum oil to alleviate tebuconazol-induced oxidative stress in the liver of adult rats. Cellular and Molecular Biology (Noisy-le-Grand, France) , 65 (8), 23-31.
 - Bhattacharjee,  P .,  Borah,  A.,  &amp;  Das,  S.  .  Quercetin-induced amelioration of Deltamethrin stress in freshwater teleost, Channa punctata: Multiple biomarker analysis. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology. Toxicology &amp; Pharmacology , 227 , 108626.
- • - Cai, W., Yang, X., Li, X., Li, H., Wang, S., Wu, Z., Yu, M., Ma, S., &amp; Tang, S. . Low-dose Roundup induces developmental toxicity in bovine preimplantation embryos in vitro. Environmental Science and Pollution Research International , 27 (14), 16451-16459.
 - Cao, Y.,  Gong, Y.,  Liu,  L.,  Zhou, Y.,  Fang,  X.,  Zhang,  C.,  Li, Y.,  &amp;  Li,  J. . The use of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) as an in vitro model to assess the toxicity of nanoparticles to endothelium: a review. Journal of Applied Toxicology , 37 (12), 1359-1369.
- Deng, Y., Zhang, Y., Lu, Y., Zhao, Y., &amp; Ren, H. . Hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity induced by the chlorpyrifos and chlorpyrifosmethyl metabolite, 3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinol,  in  orally  exposed mice'. The Science of the Total Environment , 544 , 507-514.
- Dokuyucu, R., Bilgili, A., Hanedan, B., Dogan, H., Dokuyucu, A., &amp; Celik, M. M. . Attenuating effects of caffeic acid phenethyl ester with intralipid on hepatotoxicity of chlorpyrifos in the case of rats . Medicina , 67 (6), 743-749.
- Ferreira, D., da Motta, A. C., Kreutz, L. C., Toni, C., Loro, V. L., &amp; Barcellos, L. J. . Assessment of oxidative stress in Rhamdia quelen exposed to agrichemicals. Chemosphere , 79 (9), 914-921.
- Gholami-Seyedkolaei, S. J., Mirvaghefi, A., Farahmand, H., &amp; Kosari, A. A. . Effect of a glyphosate-based herbicide in Cyprinus carpio: assessment of acetylcholinesterase activity, hematological responses and serum biochemical parameters. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety , 98 , 135-141.
- Gündüz, E., Ülger, B. V., İbiloğlu, İ., Ekinci, A., Dursun, R., Zengin, Y., İçer,  M.,  Uslukaya,  Ö.,  Ekinci,  C.,  &amp;  Güloğlu,  C.  .  Glutamine provides effective protection against deltamethrin-induced acute hepatotoxicity in rats but not against nephrotoxicity. Medical  Science  Monitor:International  Medical  Journal  of  Experimental and Clinical Research , 21 , 1107-1114.
- Hatami, M., Banaee, M., &amp; Nematdoost Haghi, B. . Sub-lethal toxicity of chlorpyrifos alone and in combination with polyethylene glycol to common carp (Cyprinus carpio). Chemosphere , 219 , 981-988.
- Jovanovic, P ., Zoric, L., Stefanovic, I., Dzunic, B., Djordjevic-Jocic, J., Radenkovic, M., &amp; Jovanovic, M. . Lactate dehydrogenase and oxidative stress activity in primary open-angle glaucoma aqueous humour. Bosnian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences , 10 (1), 83-88.
- Kim, K. H., Kabir, E., &amp; Jahan, S. A. . Exposure to pesticides and the associated human health effects. The Science of the Total Environment , 575 , 525-535.
- Kumar, A., Sharma, R., Rana, D., &amp; Sharma, N. . Protective Effect of Alpha-Tocopherol in Deltamethrin Induced Immunotoxicity, Endocrine, Metabolic &amp; Immune Disorders - Drug Targets,19 (2), 171-184.
- Laetz, C. A., Baldwin, D. H., Collier, T. K., Hebert, V., Stark, J. D., &amp; Scholz, N. L. . The synergistic toxicity of pesticide mixtures: implications for risk assessment and the conservation of endangered Pacific salmon. Environmental Health Perspectives , 117 (3), 348-353.
- Li, M. H., Ruan, L. Y., Zhou, J. W., Fu, Y. H., Jiang, L., Zhao, H., &amp; Wang, J. S. . Metabolic profiling of goldfish (Carassius auratis) after long-term glyphosate-based herbicide exposure. Aquatic Toxicology (Amsterdam, Netherlands ), 188 , 159-169.
- Li, S., Jiang, Y., Sun, Q., Coffin, S., Chen, L., Qiao, K., Gui, W., &amp; Zhu, G. . Tebuconazole induced oxidative stress related hepatotoxicity in adult and larval zebrafish (Danio rerio). Chemosphere , 241 , 125129.
- Lu, Q., Sun, Y., Ares, I., Anadón, A., Martínez, M., Martínez-Larrañaga, M. R., Yuan, Z., Wang, X., &amp; Martínez, M. A. . Deltamethrin toxicity:  A  review  of  oxidative  stress  and  metabolism. Environmental Research , 170 , 260-281.
- Mansour, S. A., &amp; Mossa, A. T. . Adverse effects of exposure to low doses of chlorpyrifos in lactating rats. Toxicology and Industrial Health , 27 (3), 213-224.
- Martínez,  M.  A.,  Rodríguez,  J.  L.,  Lopez-Torres,  B.,  Martínez,  M., Martínez-Larrañaga, M. R., Maximiliano, J. E., Anadón, A., &amp; Ares, I. . Use of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells to evaluate glyphosate-induced effects on oxidative stress, neuronal development and cell death signaling pathways. Environment International , 135 , 105414.
 - Medina-Leyte, D. J., Domínguez-Pérez, M., Mercado, I., VillarrealMolina, M.T., &amp; Jacobo-Albavera, L. . Use of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) as a model to study cardiovascular disease: A review. Applied Sciences, 10(3), 938.
- Nasr, H. M., El-Demerdash, F. M., &amp; El-Nagar, W. A. . Neuro and renal toxicity induced by chlorpyrifos and abamectin in rats: Toxicity  of  insecticide  mixture. Environmental Science and Pollution Research International , 23 (2), 1852-1859.
- Ncir, M., Ben Salah, G., Kamoun, H., Makni Ayadi, F., Khabir, A., El Feki, A., &amp; Saoudi, M. . Histopathological, oxidative damage, biochemical, and genotoxicity alterations in hepatic rats exposed to  deltamethrin:  modulatory  effects  of  garlic  (Allium  sativum). Canadian journal of Physiology and Pharmacology , 94 (6), 571-578.
- Ndonwi, E.  N.,  Atogho-Tiedeu,  B.,  Lontchi-Yimagou,  E.,  Shinkafi, T.  S.,  Nanfa,  D.,  Balti,  E.  V.,  Indusmita,  R.,  Mahmood,  A.,  Katte,  J. C.,  Mbanya,  A.,  Matsha, T.,  Mbanya,  J.  C.,  Shakir,  &amp;  A.,  Sobngwi, E.  .  Gestational  Exposure  to  Pesticides  Induces  Oxidative Stress  and  Lipid  Peroxidation  in  Offspring  that  Persist  at  Adult Age in an Animal Model. Toxicological Research , 35 (3), 241-248.
- Odetti, L. M., López González, E. C., Romito, M. L., Simoniello, M. F., &amp; Poletta, G. L. . Genotoxicity and oxidative stress in Caiman latirostris hatchlings exposed to pesticide formulations and their mixtures  during  incubation  period. Ecotoxicology  and  Environmental Safety , 193 , 110312.
- Olsvik, P . A., Berntssen, M., &amp; Søfteland, L. . In vitro toxicity of pirimiphos-methyl in Atlantic salmon hepatocytes. Toxicology in Vitro , 39 , 1-14.
- Oyesola, T., Iranloye, B., &amp; Adegoke, O. . Implantation and pregnancy outcome of Sprague-Dawley rats exposed to pirimiphos-methyl. Endocrine Regulations , 53 (3), 139-145.
- Piatti, E., Marabini, L., &amp; Chiesara, E. . Increase of micronucleus frequency in cultured rat hepatocytes treated in vitro with benomyl and pirimiphos-methyl separately and in mixture. Mutation Research , 324 (1-2), 59-64.
- Roelofs,  M., Temming,  A.  R.,  Piersma,  A.  H.,  van  den  Berg,  M.,  &amp; van Duursen, M. . Conazole fungicides inhibit Leydig cell testosterone secretion and androgen receptor activation in vitro. Toxicology Reports , 1 , 271-283.
- Sai, L., Li, X., Liu, Y., Guo, Q., Xie, L., Yu, G., Bo, C., Zhang, Z., &amp; Li, L. . Effects of chlorpyrifos on reproductive toxicology of male rats. Environmental Toxicology , 29 (9), 1083-1088.
- Staal, Y., Meijer, J., van der Kris, R., de Bruijn, A. C., Boersma, A. Y., Gremmer, E. R., Zwart, E. P ., Beekhof, P . K., Slob, W., &amp; van der Ven, L. . Head skeleton malformations in zebrafish (Danio rerio) to assess adverse effects of mixtures of compounds. Archives of Toxicology , 92 (12), 3549-3564 - Tilak, K. S., Veeraiah, K., &amp; Rao, D. K. . Biochemical changes induced by chlorpyrifos, an organophosphate compound in sublethal concentrations to the freshwater fish Catla catla, Labeo rohita and Cirrhinus mrigala. Journal of Environmental Biology , 26 (2 Suppl), 341-347.
- Velki,  M.,  &amp;  Hackenberger,  B.  K.  .  Different  sensitivities  of biomarker responses in two epigeic earthworm species after exposure to pyrethroid and organophosphate insecticides. Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology , 65 (3), 498-509.
- Vijitharan, V., Warnasekare, J., Lokunarangoda, N. C., Farah, M. F., &amp; Siribaddana, S. H. . Fatal poisoning with plant growth regulator - chlormequat. The Ceylon Medical Journal , 61 (2), 89-90.
- Wang, X., Shen, M., Zhou, J., &amp; Jin, Y. . Chlorpyrifos disturbs hepatic metabolism associated with oxidative stress and gut microbiota  dysbiosis  in  adult  zebrafish. Comparative  Biochemistry and Physiology. Toxicology &amp; Pharmacology , 216 , 19-28.
- Xiagedeer, B., Wu, S., Liu, Y., &amp; Hao, W. . Chlormequat chloride retards rat embryo growth in vitro. Toxicology in Vitro , 34 , 274-282.
 - Yang,  J.,  Gong,  Y.,  Cai,  J.,  Zheng,  Y.,  Liu,  H.,  &amp;  Zhang,  Z.  . 'Chlorpyrifos induces redox imbalance-dependent inflammation in  common carp lymphocyte through dysfunction of T-cell receptor γ'. Journal of Fish Diseases , 43 (4), 423-430.
- Yıldırım, E., Baydan, E., Kanbur, M., Kul, O., Cınar, M., Ekici, H., &amp; Atmaca, N. . 'The effect of chlorpyrifos on isolated thoracic aorta in rats.' BioMed Research International , 2013, 376051.
- Zaki,  S.  M.,  Algaleel, W.,  Imam,  R.  A.,  Soliman,  G.  F.,  &amp;  Ghoneim, F. M. . Nano-curcumin versus curcumin in amelioration of deltamethrin-induced hippocampal damage. Histochemistry and Cell Biology , 154 (2), 157-175 - Zhang, H. C., Yang, Y. J., Ma, K. X., Shi, C. Y., Chen, G. W., &amp; Liu, D. Z. . 'A novel sigma class glutathione S-transferase gene in freshwater planarian Dugesia japonica: cloning, characterization and protective effects in herbicide glyphosate stress'. Ecotoxicology (London, England) , 29 (3), 295-304.