<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/taap

## De /uniFB01 ning toxicological tipping points in neuronal network development ☆

Christopher L. Frank a,1 , Jasmine P. Brown a,2 , Kathleen Wallace a , John F. Wambaugh b , Imran Shah b , Timothy J. Shafer a, ⁎

- a Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, National Health and Environmental E /uniFB00 ects Research Laboratory, EPA, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA

b

National Center for Computational Toxicology, EPA, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA

## A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords: Network development In vitro Tipping point Screening

## 1. Introduction

The lack of information on the potential for tens of thousands of chemicals in the environment to cause developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) is well documented (Grandjean and Landrigan, 2006, 2014). Because guideline DNT studies (US EPA, 1998; OECD, 2007) are expensive, time-consuming and animal intensive (Smirnova et al., 2014), it is now generally recognized that it will be necessary to use a battery of in vitro screening assays (Bal-Price et al., 2010, 2015; Fritsche et al., 2017) to screen thousands of compounds for their potential to cause DNT and thus prioritize them for additional testing. To this end, a wide variety of assays have been developed to determine the e /uniFB00 ects of compounds on processes critical to the development of the nervous system, including proliferation (Breier et al., 2008), neurite outgrowth

## A B S T R A C T

Measuring electrical activity of neural networks by microelectrode array (MEA) has recently shown promise for screening level assessments of chemical toxicity on network development and function. Important aspects of interneuronal communication can be quanti /uniFB01 ed from a single MEA recording, including individual /uniFB01 ring rates, coordinated bursting, and measures of network synchrony, providing rich datasets to evaluate chemical e /uniFB00 ects. Further, multiple recordings can be made from the same network, including during the formation of these networks in vitro . The ability to perform multiple recording sessions over the in vitro development of network activity may provide further insight into developmental e /uniFB00 ects of neurotoxicants. In the current study, a recently described MEA-based screen of 86 compounds in primary rat cortical cultures over 12 days in vitro was revisited to establish a framework that integrates all available primary measures of electrical activity from MEA recordings into a composite metric for deviation from normal activity (total scalar perturbation). Examining scalar perturbations over time and increasing concentration of compound allowed for de /uniFB01 nition of critical concentrations or ' tipping points ' at which the neural networks switched from recovery to non-recovery trajectories for 42 compounds. These tipping point concentrations occurred at predominantly lower concentrations than those causing overt cell viability loss or disrupting individual network parameters, suggesting tipping points may be a more sensitive measure of network functional loss. Comparing tipping points for six compounds with plasma concentrations known to cause developmental neurotoxicity in vivo demonstrated strong concordance and suggests there is potential for using tipping points for chemical prioritization.

(Radio and Mundy, 2008; Harrill et al., 2010; Stiegler et al., 2011), synaptogenesis (Harrill et al., 2011), transcriptomic responses (Krug et al., 2013), di /uniFB00 erentiation (Schmuck et al., 2017), and migration (Zimmer et al., 2014).

Formation of interconnected neural networks is critical to development of the nervous system. In vivo formation of networks occurs as the structures of the nervous system develop, and connections between di /uniFB00 erent neurons form as axons and dendrites extend using chemical and electrical cues as guidance. Similar in vitro network activity arises spontaneously in primary monolayer cultures from many di /uniFB00 erent brain regions, including the cortex, hippocampus, and brainstem as dissociated neurons (re)establish synaptic connections. Both in the brain and in primary cultures, this spontaneous electrical activity becomes patterned and coordinated over time, with synchronous bursting

☆ Preparation of this document has been funded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. This document has been subjected to review by the National Health and Environmental E /uniFB00 ects Research Laboratory (NHEERL) and approved for publication. Approval does not signify that the contents re /uniFB02 ect the views of the Agency, nor does mention of trade names or commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.

⁎ Corresponding author at: Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, US EPA, MD105-03, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA. E-mail address: Shafer.tim@epa.gov (T.J. Shafer).

1 Current a /uniFB03 liation: Element Genomics, Durham, NC, USA.

2 JPB was supported by Student Services Contract #EP-14-D-000101.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

observed. In vivo synchronous bursting is associated with important nervous system processes including attention, learning, and memory (Buschman and Kastner, 2015; Korte and Schmitz, 2016; Salinas and Sejnowski, 2001). In vitro , such activity can be observed in networks of developing neurons using microelectrode array (MEA) recording techniques (Chiappalone et al., 2003; Van Pelt et al., 2004; Wagenaar et al., 2006; Cotterill et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2016). MEAs measure extracellular electrical activity associated with the generation and propagation of action potentials (spikes). Over time, patterned activity in the form of groups of spikes (bursts) from the same neuron, as well as coordinated bursting of multiple neurons across a network are readily observed. Measuring chemical e /uniFB00 ects on the development of spontaneous network activity has been proposed as a screening assay for DNT (Hogberg et al., 2011; Robinette et al., 2011; Dingemans et al., 2016), and our laboratory recently demonstrated that by using multi-well MEAs (mwMEAs) a medium-throughput assay is feasible (Brown et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017).

Our laboratory recently reported results using this medium-throughput mwMEA-based DNT assay for 86 compounds, demonstrating that 49 of 60 (82%) compounds with evidence of developmental neurotoxicity in the published literature altered development of at least one network parameter (Frank et al., 2017). These data also were used to develop estimates of potency (e /uniFB00 ective concentration that caused a 50% change; EC50 value) for those compounds that altered network development (64/86). Although such information is useful for prioritization for additional testing, relating in vitro perturbations to in vivo adversity is a key challenge for 21st century toxicology (Keller et al., 2012). To address this issue, Shah et al. (2016) developed a novel systems toxicology approach to identify toxicological ' tipping points ' between adaptation and adversity.

Toxicological ' tipping points ' are de /uniFB01 ned by Shah et al. as dosedependent transitions in cells based on their inability to recover to normal (or basal) functions. To analyze tipping points they examined data on the e /uniFB00 ects of almost a thousand ToxCast chemicals in HepG2 cells using multiple high-content imaging (HCI) endpoints over time (0, 1, 24 and 72 h). They translated the temporal response of HepG2 cells to each chemical treatment as cell-state trajectories. Interestingly, all chemical e /uniFB00 ects on cells could be classi /uniFB01 ed into three main groups: no e /uniFB00 ect, recovering and nonrecovering trajectories. Recovering trajectories were characterized by a return of cells to their normal (or basal) states. On the other hand, nonrecovering trajectories were assumed to be indicative of a loss of cellular homeostatic capacity. They de /uniFB01 ned the transition from recovering to nonrecovering trajectories as the tipping point, and the corresponding chemical concentration as the critical concentration. This approach for identifying tipping points developed by Shah et al. is quite general and can be readily applied to other in vitro models that involve temporal measurements.

In the present study, we used the data from Frank et al., 2017, to determine tipping points for chemical e /uniFB00 ects on in vitro neural network formation, and to estimate the corresponding critical chemical concentrations. The results indicate that by consideration of a uni /uniFB01 ed framework for network formation, critical concentrations can be determined for many compounds that altered neural network development, and that in many cases, these concentrations are lower than the EC50 values for individual parameters describing neural network function or the composite values for e /uniFB00 ects on all parameters. Further, using high-throughput toxicokinetic estimates, we demonstrate that the tipping point concentrations for a small subset of chemicals are concordant with plasma concentrations in vivo that are associated with developmental neurotoxicity. The results indicate that such an analysis can provide a robust and sensitive determination of the point at which compounds begin to alter neural network development in vitro .

## 2. Methods

## 2.1. Compounds and methods

The present study represents additional analysis of the data presented in Frank et al., 2017. Brie /uniFB02 y, in that study, concentrationdependent (typically 0.03 to 30 μ M) e /uniFB00 ects of 86 compounds on neural network development were measured in primary cortical cultures prepared from day old rat pups using mwMEA recordings across 4 time points (Days in vitro (DIV) 5, 7, 9 and 12). Sixty of the tested compounds had at least limited literature evidence of DNT e /uniFB00 ects in humans or animal models (Mundy et al., 2015), 4 additional compounds had been previously tested in this assay (Brown et al., 2016) and found to impact network function (bisindolylmaleimide I, loperamide, mevastatin, and sodium orthovanadate), and 21 compounds were classi /uniFB01 ed as unknowns with insu /uniFB03 cient evidence for DNT e /uniFB00 ects in the published literature. Acetaminophen was used as a negative control. Cultures were plated at 150,000 cells/well in 48 well microelectrode array plates from Axion Biosystems (M768-KAP-48) using standardized culture and plating protocols (Cotterill et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2016), and chemical treatment commenced 2 h after plating of the cells and continued throughout the experiment. Chemicals were renewed when media was refreshed on DIV 5, and 9. As described in complete detail in Brown et al., 2016, electrical activity in the cultures was recorded for 15 min on DIV 5, 7, 9 and 12 using an Axion Maestro ampli /uniFB01 er, Middleman A/ D conversion, and AXiS 1.9 or later software. Axion raw (*.raw) and spike (*.spk) /uniFB01 les were saved to a redundant physical hard drive for later analysis. Culture viability was assessed following the /uniFB01 nal DIV12 recording using total LDH release and CellTiter-Blue assays as described in Frank et al., 2017.

## 2.2. Initial data processing and normalization

Axion spikelist /uniFB01 les with time-stamped spikes were combined with comma-separated plate layout data for conversion to hierarchical data format (.h5) /uniFB01 les. Hierarchical data format /uniFB01 les were used as input to the ' meadq ' (https://github.com/dianaransomhall/meadq) and ' sjemea ' (https://github.com/sje30/sjemea) R packages, which together generated a set of 16 network measures per well that were used for downstream analyses with date and plate ID tracking information attached. An additional network parameter, normalized mutual information (Ball et al., 2017), a measure of shared information in the network, was computed for each recording separately. Nine of the 17 network parameters (mean /uniFB01 ring rate (MFR), number of active electrodes (#AE), burst rate (BR), number of actively bursting electrodes (#ABE), percent of spikes in bursts (%SiB), number of network spikes (#NS), percent of spikes in network spikes (%SiNS), Pearson's correlation (r) between activity on electrodes, and normalized mutual information (MI)) were selected for incorporation into the critical concentration analysis.

To reduce the impact of any batch e /uniFB00 ects, raw network parameter values were normalized by dividing by the median of untreated control well values located on the same plate and on the same DIV (5, 7, 9, or 12). If the median of same-plate untreated control wells was zero, all values for that parameter on that plate were set to 1 (no change from controls). The fold-change from control median values were then logtransformed to reduce the impact of outlier values. The mean and standard deviation of log-transformed fold change values of all untreated control wells on the same DIV were then used to z-score scale all fold-change values. This resulted in values centered at zero that indicate the number standard deviations away from the untreated control mean (positive or negative).

## 2.3. Tipping point analysis

We used the methods described previously (Shah et al., 2016) to identify tipping points by calculating the following four quantities from the data: system perturbation ( X ), total scalar perturbation (| X |), velocity ( V ) and derivative of the velocity with respect to concentration ( ∂ Vc ). A conceptual overview of these quantities is provided in Fig. 1. The scripts used for the analysis of tipping points are available at the

Fig. 1. Understanding tipping points. The graph shows the relationship between scalar system perturbation (|X|),time (t) and velocity (V) for di /uniFB00 erent theoretical trajectories. With increasing chemical stimulation, the system deviates from a normal trajectory to recovery (V &lt; 0), and then to adversity (V &gt; 0). A tipping point is the critical transition between recovery and adversity (V = 0).

<!-- image -->

following doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.23719/1407690. First, the z-scores of the nine normalized network parameters (MFR, #AE, BR, #ABE, % SiB, #NS, %SiNS, r and MI) from each well were used to represent the system perturbation at DIV 5, 7, 9, and 12 (denoted as X 5, X 7, X 9, and X 12, respectively) for each treatment replicate. Second, total scalar perturbation values (| X 5|, | X 7|, | X 9|, and | X 12|) were calculated from the system perturbation as the Euclidean norm. This resulted in strictly positive values representative of the total number of standard deviations away from ' normal ' network recordings at each time point. The di /uniFB00 erence between scalar perturbation values at DIV 5, 7, or 9 and the terminal DIV 12 value were divided by the number of days elapsed to calculate a numerical derivative of change in scalar perturbation over change in time (denoted as V 5, V 7, V 9, and V 12). These values were termed ' velocities ' of the system and plotted as individual well velocities over increasing concentration of compound. The velocity over concentration relationship for all replicates was approximated with a localized regression function (loess function in R v3.2.5; R Core Team, 2016). The derivative of the velocity with respect to concentration (denoted as ∂ Vc ) for each compound was then taken to search for a critical concentration at which the slope of velocity changes from negative to positive.

## 2.4. Critical concentration determination

A search for a critical concentration was triggered when a compound had at least one concentration that produced a terminal DIV 12 scalar perturbation beyond 3 times the median absolute deviation (MAD) of untreated control wells (indicating that the compound perturbed the system beyond random variation). Both negative and positive velocity values along the concentration curve (indicating both recovery and non-recovery trajectories) also were required to identify a critical concentration. If the highest concentration of compound produced negative velocity derivative values, these values were excluded from consideration as they were found to represent a topping out of scalar perturbation values at total network failure (associated with gross cell loss). The concentration at the last V =0crossing point of the velocity derivative (going from negative to positive) was then taken as the critical concentration. If multiple V =0 crossings occurred, the greater concentration was selected as the critical concentration to be more conservative in estimating compound e /uniFB00 ects.

Uncertainty in the critical concentration value was estimated by randomly leaving out one replicate for each concentration of a compound and estimating a new critical concentration for the incomplete dataset using the above-described method. This process was repeated 1000 times and the 95% con /uniFB01 dence interval was taken as the range of 950 out of the 1000 sampled values.

## 2.5. Network parameter inclusion

In Frank et al., 2017, a total of 17 di /uniFB00 erent parameters were determined from the recordings of network activity. However, 8 of these parameters were derived from nine ' empirical ' parameters that were collected directly from the recording ( e.g. burst duration is unde /uniFB01 ned in the absence of bursting). To determine whether parameter inclusion would substantially change interpretation of network trajectories, a collection of 9 out of the 17 total network parameters were randomly selected 100 times and scalar perturbations over time were calculated for each compound as described above. Con /uniFB01 dence intervals (95%) were then estimated at each time point from the central 95 out of 100 median scalar perturbation trajectories. These ranges were qualitatively assessed to determine whether overall system recovery and non-recovery trends remained present with di /uniFB00 erent network parameter inclusion.

## 2.6. Comparison to cytotoxicity and individual network parameter e /uniFB00 ects

The critical concentrations derived herein were compared to the EC50 values for chemical e /uniFB00 ects on individual network parameters and viability that were published previously in Frank et al., 2017. The EC50 values were determined by calculating the area under the curve (AUC) for each well over time, as described in Brown et al., 2016 and Frank et al., 2017. Brie /uniFB02 y, the temporal component of parameters describing network function ( e.g. MFR, #AE, etc.) from each well's recordings was reduced to a single area under the curve (AUC) value by calculating the trapezoidal area under the curve for each treatment concentration. Raw AUC values were normalized by same plate untreated control means. For chemicals that produced AUC values exceeding 3× the MAD of untreated control wells for any concentration, 4-parameter log-logistic curves were /uniFB01 t to model concentration-response relationships.

Raw cell viability assay values from alamar blue and lactase dehydrogenase (LDH) assays were normalized by subtracting blank well controls and dividing by the median of untreated well absorbance. Concentration-response relationships and the concentrations that produced a median 50% or greater reduction in cell viability value were determined. Since these assays were conducted at only a single time point, AUC values were not determined. The lower of the two concentrations identi /uniFB01 ed by cytotoxicity assays (LDH release or reduction of resazurin) was used for comparison with tipping point concentrations.

## 2.7. Comparison to in vivo results using toxicokinetics

The R package ' httk ' (Pearce et al., 2017) includes both chemicalspeci /uniFB01 c in vitro data and models for predicting in vivo toxicokinetics ( i.e. , absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion). Six study chemicals with literature in vivo data on doses causing neurological e /uniFB00 ects in laboratory animals (see Table 1) following developmental exposure also were available for simulation with ' httk ' . These six chemicals had chemical speci /uniFB01 c in vitro toxicokinetic measurements and physico-chemical properties ( i.e. , molecular weight, hydrophobicity, and ionization equilibria). Where rat-speci /uniFB01 c in vitro toxicokinetic data were available, these were used; otherwise rat physiology and human in vitro data were used. Human in vitro data were used for all mouse predictions. Version 1.8 was used with non-restrictive metabolism assumed ( i.e. , that chemical bound to protein rapidly dissociates to be metabolized in the liver). The function ' solve\_pbtk ' was used to model a generic physiologically-based toxicokinetic (PBTK) model featuring liver, kidney, gut, venous, arterial, and rest of body compartments. Time-integrated plasma concentration

Table 1 Studies used for comparison to in vivo data.

| Dose                | 3 4.5 2.5 10 3 15 0.1 0.1 1 15                                                                                                                                                                                     | 0.35 10                          | Compound.abbrev        | Chlo Chlo Diaz Diaz Chlo Chlo Diet Diet Chlo Chlo Diel Diel                                                                                   |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| References          | Dam et al., 2000 Ricceri et al., 2006 Nicosia et al., 2003 Frieder et al., 1984 Clark et al., 1970 Hannah et al., 1982 Mihalick, 2003 Kaitsuka et al., 2007 Adams, 1982 Kurishingal et al.,1992 Olson et al., 1980 | Brannen et al., 1998             | Higher.95..CI          |                                                                                                                                               |
| Endpoint            | Neurochemistry, behavior Behavior Behavior Behavior Behavior Morphology Behavior Behavior, neurochemistry Behavior Behavior                                                                                        | Behavior Neurochemistry          | Lower.95..CI           | 0.072 1.828 0.072 1.828 7.405 16.267 7.405 16.267 0.267 0.762 0.267 0.762 0.06 4.015 0.06 4.015 1.828 2.83 1.828 2.83 0.347 2.177 0.347 2.177 |
| Dose.Route          | 1 - 5 mg/kg, s.c. 3 - 6 mg/kg, oral 2.5 mg/kg, s.c. 10 mg/kg, s.c. 3 mg/kg, s.c. 15 mg/kg, i.m. 0.1 μ g, s.c. 0.1 μ g/kg, oral 1 mg/kg, i.p. 10 - 20 mg/kg, s.c.                                                   | 0.35 μ g/kg, oral 10 mg/kg, i.p. | Critical.concentration | 1.23 1.23 9.766 9.766 0.476 0.476 2.675 2.675 2.454 2.454 1.035 1.035                                                                         |
| Exposure            | Postnatal Pre/postnatal Prenatal Pre/postnatal Prenatal Pre/postnatal Postnatal Prenatal Pre/postnatal Prenatal                                                                                                    | Pre/postnatal Prenatal           | AUC                    | 0.291206 0.119065 0.138648 0.554593 0.102801 0.514056 7.79E-06 1.38E-07 0.127206 1.101632 2.56E-06 0.561138                                   |
| Species             | Rat Mouse Rat Rat Rat Rat Mouse Mouse Rat Mouse                                                                                                                                                                    | Rat Rat                          | Cmax                   | 405.782 0.955984 292.2317 1168.927 220.0537 1100.269 0.020638 1.63E-06 168.5788 1593.209 1.49E-05 1148.892                                    |
| DSSTox_Substance_Id | DTXSID4020458 DTXSID4020458 DTXSID4020406 DTXSID4020406 DTXSID0022808 DTXSID0022808 DTXSID3020465 DTXSID3020465 DTXSID4046022 DTXSID4046022                                                                        | DTXSID9020453 DTXSID9020453      | Route Days             | s.c. 4 oral 4 s.c. 8 s.c. 7 s.c. 1 i.m. 4 s.c. 10 oral 7 i.p. 21 s.c. 10 oral 17 i.p. 6                                                       |
| Chemical            | Chlorpyrifos* Chlorpyrifos* Diazepam Diazepam Chlorpromazine Chlorpromazine Diethylstilbestrol Diethylstilbestrol Chlordiazepoxide* Chlordiazepoxide*                                                              | Dieldrin Dieldrin                | Dose.Units             | mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg μ g μ g/kg mg/kg mg/kg μ g/kg mg/kg                                                                       |
| Substance_CASRN     | 2921-88-2 2921-88-2 439-14-5 439-14-5 50-53-3 50-53-3 56-53-1 56-53-1 58-25-3 58-25-3                                                                                                                              | 60-57-1 60-57-1                  | Substance_CASRN        | 2921-88-2 2921-88-2 439-14-5 439-14-5 50-53-3 50-53-3 56-53-1 56-53-1 58-25-3 58-25-3 60-57-1 60-57-1                                         |

(area under the curve or AUC) was calculated for the species, doses, number of days, and administration routes as indicated by Table 1. Due to software limitations, intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, and intramuscular injection routes were all modeled as intravenous doses.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Calculation of network scalar perturbations

Complex primary cultures isolated from newborn rat cortex exhibit a reproducible developmental trajectory as neurite outgrowth leads to synaptogenesis and increasing network activity over approximately two weeks in vitro (Cotterill et al., 2016). mwMEA recordings over this time period provide multiparametric data that includes measures of spike, burst, and network synchrony in each culture. Our previous work demonstrated that many compounds that are developmentally neurotoxic in mammals perturb these parameters (Frank et al., 2017). Because of the temporal nature of our previous data, it was possible to determine a critical concentration at which a given compound began to perturb the developing system beyond recovery. Such concentrations may represent the transition point in the series of events that results in developmental neurotoxicity. To determine these tipping points, it was /uniFB01 rst necessary to transform network parameter data into values that de /uniFB01 ne a distance from normal activity range. Importantly, normal network values change across developmental time as activity and synchrony increase between DIV5 and DIV12, so a normal range needs to be rede /uniFB01 ned at each time point. To reduce variation attributed to cortical culture batch and plateto-plate variability, the 17 individual network parameters quanti /uniFB01 ed from recordings were /uniFB01 rst divided by the median value of untreated control wells run on the same plate and same DIV to obtain fold-change values. Log-transformed fold-change values were then standardized by subtracting the mean fold-change and standard deviation of the same DIV untreated control wells. Standardizing to the distribution of all untreated control wells on each DIV yielded z-score values that re/uniFB02 ected the number of standard deviations away from normal at each time point; ensuring that all network parameters were measured on a common scale (Fig. 2).

Examination of z-score values over time revealed a number of different trajectories a network might take depending on the concentration of compound present. For a compound that did not appreciably impact network activity, such as acetaminophen, all concentrations resulted in network parameter trajectories that vary within the normal range of controls (Fig. 2B). In contrast, for compounds that signi /uniFB01 cantly perturbed normal network development, such as haloperidol, a concentration-response relationship was often observed whereby the zscore perturbation exits the normal range of controls in a positive or negative direction at certain timepoints and this departure becomes more pronounced with increasing concentration (Fig. 2C). Interestingly, it was noted that intermediate concentrations of many compounds, including haloperidol, produce z-score perturbations that exit the normal range at earlier recording time points, but return to fall within normal range by DIV12. This occurred in the presence of compound exposure, which was from 2 h after plating through DIV12.

By integrating data from multiple measures of network activity, it was reasoned a more comprehensive and reliable metric of network function could be de /uniFB01 ned. To this end, the total perturbation of the cortical network was de /uniFB01 ned by the sum of individual network parameter perturbations observed. In particular, the Euclidean norm of 9 network parameters was selected at each time point to equally weight values that depart from the normal range in both the positive and negative direction. This resulted in total system scalar perturbation over time trajectories that were visualized for each replicate and summarized by localized regression curves (Fig. 3). For example, the total scalar perturbation of acetaminophen remained below the shaded uncertainty range of 3× the median absolute deviation (MAD) of untreated control wells across all timepoints (Fig. 3A). In contrast, the scalar perturbation of haloperidol exposure increased with increasing haloperidol concentration and extended well past the 3× MAD limit (Fig. 3B). Interestingly, the two highest concentrations of haloperidol tested (10 and 30 μ M) caused apparent network failure (maximal scalar perturbation), while lower concentrations (0.3 -3 μ M) exhibited some recovery toward the normal range by DIV 12, re /uniFB02 ecting the similar trends observed in the individual parameter z-score transformations. Graphs showing Zscores and total scalar perturbations are available for all compounds at the following doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.23719/1407690.

The decision to model system scalar perturbation as a function of 9 of the 17 network parameters measured was made for two reasons. First, the 9 selected parameters (MFR, #AE, BR, #ABE, %SiB, #NS, % SiNS, r, and MI) are directly calculated from the recording spike trains, as opposed to the other 8 network parameters that are dependent upon non-zero values for one of the selected parameters. For example, the mean network spike duration (NSD) is dependent upon the observation of at least one network spike during the recording time, else it remains unde /uniFB01 ned. At earlier time points in development, the cortical cultures have little or no network spiking and bursting activity and this results in many unde /uniFB01 ned values for the dependent parameters that could introduce extra uncertainty into the analysis. Second, it was found that random selection of 9 out of the 17 network parameters for calculation of total system perturbation did not qualitatively alter the overall concentration-dependent trajectories of network scalar perturbation (data not shown). That is, concentrations that showed a pattern of escalating scalar perturbation over time or exhibited a recovery trend with the 9 selected parameters, produced a similar pattern with random selection of network parameters. Together, these results suggested that inclusion of the additional 8 network parameters would introduce additional uncertainty into the analysis without contributing to su /uniFB03 -ciently di /uniFB00 erent trajectories that would meaningfully change interpretation of recovery and non-recovery trends.

## 3.2. Determination of critical concentrations

Determination of a critical concentration was based on the premise that a developing cortical network is in some ways capable of adapting to the presence of certain compounds at particular concentrations ( i.e. , overcoming the initial perturbation). Therefore, after calculation of scalar perturbation values, it was important to /uniFB01 rst establish that instances of network recovery could be identi /uniFB01 ed in the assay. If the median scalar perturbation of a treatment group exceeded three times the MAD of untreated control wells at DIV 5, 7, or 9, but then returned to a median value closer to zero at the /uniFB01 nal time point (DIV 12), this was taken as preliminary evidence of system recovery in the presence of a given compound at a de /uniFB01 ned concentration. Applying these criteria, evidence of system recovery was observed in 54 out of the 86 compounds (62.8%) for at least one concentration (Supp. Table 1). The presence of these scalar perturbation trajectories indicated the assay is capable of modeling treatments where neural networks are disrupted at one stage of in vitro development but exhibit a return to normal range at a later time.

To further model the dynamics of system recovery and failure in the presence of tested compounds, the ' velocity ' of scalar perturbation values was calculated between DIV 5, 7, or 9 and DIV 12 to determine the transition from a system recovery to a non-recovery trajectory. The /uniFB01 nal recording time point was chosen as a consistent anchor because it provided the strongest evidence in the assay of /uniFB01 nal system status as network development concluded ( i.e. DIV12 status best re /uniFB02 ected whether the network resembled a normal untreated network at the conclusion of in vitro development). System velocities were then plotted over increasing concentration of each compound to visualize the relationship (Fig. 4). The derivative of velocity with respect to concentration was taken to identify the point in the velocity curve where the slope changed from negative to positive, indicating a transition from a system recovery to a non-recovery trajectory. In order to focus

## Foreach culturetimepoint(DIV5,7,9,or12):

(caption on next page)

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2. Conversion of network parameters to normalized z-scores. A) Individual network parameters were calculated from raw spike train data from recordings, normalized to same-plate untreated well medians, then log-transformed and converted to z-scores ( ± 1 z-score = ± 1 standard deviation from the untreated well mean value) to put all network parameters on the same scale. Example of log-transformed and z-score distributions for untreated and treated wells are shown with histograms on right. B and C) Examples of z-scores over time for acetaminophen (B) and haloperidol (C). In each plot, the shaded gray area represents the variability of untreated control wells (3 times the median absolute deviation) and colored lines show median z-score values over time for varying concentrations of compound for one network parameter. The 8 network parameters shown are mean /uniFB01 ring rate (MFR), burst rate (BR), number of active electrodes (#AE), percent of spikes in bursts (%SiB), number of network spikes (#NS), percent of spikes in network spikes (%SiNS), mean correlation (R), and mutual information (MI).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Total Scalar Perturbations integrate changes across network parameters. Total scalar perturbations (sum of individual network parameter z-scores) for varying concentrations of acetaminophen (A) and haloperidol (B) are shown as individual data points and best /uniFB01 t lines colored by concentration over time in vitro . Shaded gray area represents 3 times the median absolute deviation of untreated control wells at each timepoint.

on compounds with a more reproducible impact on network activity and avoid over /uniFB01 tting subtle trajectories, a compound was required to have at least one concentration where the DIV 12 scalar perturbation exceeded three times the MAD of untreated control networks. The minimum concentration derived from the three time windows pro /uniFB01 led for each compound was selected to accommodate di /uniFB00 erent trajectory shapes and identify the lowest concentration with evidence of a tipping point and possible adverse e /uniFB00 ect. In total, a point of zero velocity slope (where trajectory transitioned from recovery to non-recovery) was found for 42 out of the 86 compounds, with critical concentrations ranging from 0.005 μ M for bis(tri-n-butylin) oxide to 9.77 μ M for diazepam (Table 2). Uncertainty in these critical concentrations was estimated by a 95% con /uniFB01 dence interval derived from iterative random sampling and recalculation of the critical concentration with available replicates.

The same compound often produced multiple tipping points depending on the time interval considered ( e.g. DIV 5 -12 vs DIV 9 -12). Tipping points with uncertainty ranges spanning two orders of magnitude or greater were discarded as unreliable estimates. These criteria applied to 9 out of the 42 compounds, but in no case did it remove all tipping point estimates for a compound (Supp Table 2). To interrogate the magnitude of tipping point concentration di /uniFB00 erences between different time windows, the fold-change between the most discordant pair of tipping point estimates was calculated for each compound with more than one estimate. The average fold-di /uniFB00 erence among the 33 compounds with multiple estimates was found to be 2.21 (Supp Table 2). Considering the concentration series employed in this assay was incremented by half-log units, these results showed relatively high consistency between tipping points derived from di /uniFB00 erent time intervals for the same compound.

## 3.3. Critical concentration comparison to cytotoxicity and individual network parameters

To evaluate whether the tipping point concentrations determined for the 42 compounds corresponded to treatments that also resulted in high general cytotoxicity, tipping points were compared to compound concentrations that produced a 50% reduction in cell viability levels (EC50) from resazurin reduction and LDH release assays (Frank et al., 2017) (Fig. 5A). Only two out of the 42 compounds (4.8%), emamectin benzoate and mevastatin, exhibited high cytotoxicity at concentrations lower than the tipping point estimate. For all other compounds, there was at least a 4-fold di /uniFB00 erence between the tipping point and cytotoxicity EC50. The mean di /uniFB00 erence between 50% cell viability (where de /uniFB01 ned) and tipping point concentration was 13.8-fold. This suggests that tipping points often occur at concentrations substantially lower than those causing high levels of cell viability loss in the cortical networks.

Previous analyses of these same data used an area under the curve (AUC) metric to evaluate concentration-response relationships for each compound (Frank et al., 2017). The AUC approach determined EC50 concentrations where an exposure was su /uniFB03 cient to reduce individual network parameters below 50% of control values. AUC-derived EC50 concentrations for the 9 network parameters used for scalar perturbation calculations were compared to tipping point concentrations in two ways. The /uniFB01 rst approach was to determine where the minimum of the 9 AUC-derived EC50 values fell in relation to the tipping point concentration. The second was to compare the median of the 9 AUC-derived EC50 values to the critical concentration for each compound. Both values are shown in relation to the tipping point concentration in Fig. 5B. For the majority of compounds (27/42, 64.3%), the tipping

<!-- image -->

point concentration was equal to or lower than the minimum AUCderived EC50 values identi /uniFB01 ed. For all but four compounds (emamectin benzoate, mevastatin, PBDE-47, and diazepam), the critical concentration was below the median AUC-derived EC50 values. This result suggests that in most cases, tipping points serve as a more sensitive measure of network developmental e /uniFB00 ects than looking for individual

Fig. 4. Examples of Tipping Point determinations for acetaminophen and haloperidol. Plots show DIV 12 scalar perturbation (blue line), as well as velocity of change (green line) and derivative of that velocity curve (dV/dC; red line) from DIV 9 (top), DIV 7 (middle), or DIV 5 (bottom) for varying concentrations of acetaminophen (A) or haloperidol (B). Horizontal dotted lines demarcate 3 times median absolute deviation of untreated control wells. Vertical dotted line indicates tipping point concentration, de /uniFB01 ned as the derivative of velocity over concentration transitioning from negative to positive values. For comparison, the yellow vertical line indicates the lower EC50 value for cell viability loss. (For interpretation of the references to color in this /uniFB01 gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

network parameter changes. Interestingly, in the cases where the minimum AUC-derived EC50 values fell below the critical concentration, 9 out of 15 times it was the number of network spikes parameter that produced the lowest EC50. The number of network spikes may therefore be considered the most sensitive of the 9 parameters examined.

Table 2 Critical concentrations.

| Compound                    | Timepoint comparison   |   Critical concentration ( μ M) |   Lower 95% CI |   Higher 95% CI |
|-----------------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Deltamethrin                | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.05  |          0.036 |           0.145 |
| Cytosine Arabinoside        | DIV7 to DIV12          |                           0.046 |          0.036 |           0.06  |
| DEHP                        | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.11  |          0.055 |           0.224 |
| 5-Fluorouracil              | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.142 |          0.102 |           0.172 |
| Haloperidol                 | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.309 |          0.145 |           0.492 |
| Loperamide                  | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.13  |          0.111 |           0.145 |
| Chlorpyrifos                | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           1.23  |          0.072 |           1.828 |
| Chlorpyrifos oxon           | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.071 |          0.039 |           0.133 |
| Diazepam                    | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           9.766 |          7.405 |          16.267 |
| Thiouracil                  | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           2.251 |          0.102 |           5.696 |
| t-Retinoic acid             | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           1.593 |          0.158 |           2.83  |
| Trimethyltin                | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.015 |          0.012 |           0.022 |
| Dieldrin                    | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           1.035 |          0.347 |           2.177 |
| Lead acetate                | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           2.916 |          1.828 |           4.382 |
| Cadmium                     | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.036 |          0.036 |           0.043 |
| Methylmercury               | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.037 |          0.029 |           0.041 |
| Bis1                        | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.631 |          0.015 |           0.943 |
| Domoic Acid                 | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.205 |          0.089 |           0.254 |
| Sodium Orthovanadate        | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           4.119 |          3.371 |           5.696 |
| Cypermethrin                | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.283 |          0.188 |           0.379 |
| Emamectin benzoate          | DIV7 to DIV12          |                           0.078 |          0.039 |           0.122 |
| Fipronil                    | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.799 |          0.158 |           3.089 |
| Flusilazole                 | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.085 |          0.043 |           0.291 |
| Methylchloroisothiazolinone | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.436 |          0.245 |           0.64  |
| Carbaryl                    | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.238 |          0.051 |           1.828 |
| Heptachlor epoxide          | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           1.737 |          1.288 |           1.995 |
| Lindane                     | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.799 |          0.267 |           4.782 |
| Mevastatin                  | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.476 |          0.145 |           1.535 |
| Diethylstilbestrol          | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           2.675 |          0.06  |           4.015 |
| Isoniazid                   | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.13  |          0.06  |           0.224 |
| PBDE-47                     | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           1.155 |          0.302 |           2.262 |
| Hexachlorophene             | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.155 |          0.188 |           0.537 |
| Tebuconazole                | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           1.341 |          0.122 |           4.382 |
| Aminonicotinamide           | DIV7 to DIV12          |                           0.733 |          0.379 |           1.082 |
| Bis tri n butylin oxide     | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.005 |          0.004 |           0.006 |
| Chlordiazepoxide            | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           2.454 |          1.828 |           2.83  |
| Permethrin                  | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.871 |          0.64  |           1.288 |
| Paraquat                    | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.142 |          0.102 |           0.205 |
| Sodium Arsenate             | DIV9 to DIV12          |                           0.092 |          0.055 |           0.122 |
| Fluoxetine                  | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.565 |          0.379 |           0.762 |
| Chlorpromazine              | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.476 |          0.267 |           0.762 |
| Triethyltin bromide         | DIV5 to DIV12          |                           0.022 |          0.017 |           0.024 |

## 3.4. Comparison to in vivo results using toxicokinetics

To determine how the tipping point concentrations compare to plasma levels associated with reports of neurotoxicity following exposure during development, in vitro concentration levels were converted to estimated plasma levels using the high-throughput toxicokinetic (httk) package in R. For an in vivo comparator, studies were selected from Table 1 in Mundy et al., 2015, as the studies in that publication were cited as examples of compounds with evidence for developmental neurotoxicity. There were su /uniFB03 cient in vitro toxicokinetic data available for this package for only 6 of the 42 chemicals with tipping point concentrations. Complete information on the compounds, dose levels and model estimates are provided in Table 1. When comparing the in vivo AUC concentration estimated with httk to the in vitro predicted critical concentration, the data indicate close agreement for /uniFB01 ve of the six compounds (Fig. 6). The exception was diethylstilbestrol, for which the critical concentration was higher than the in vivo estimate. There were also discordant results with dieldrin where the tipping point was less potent than one in vivo study; this was due to 3000-fold di /uniFB00 erences in the in vivo doses used.

## 4. Discussion

The present data demonstrate that, ' tipping points ' associated with alterations in network formation can be determined for a subset of compounds recently tested in Frank et al., 2017. For a subset of these compounds where enough data were available, it was possible to use high-throughput toxicokinetic (httk) model to compare in vitro tipping points to blood levels associated with neurodevelopmental outcomes in animal models; these comparisons indicated that the in vitro alterations in network function occurred at concentrations that are concordant with in vivo developmental neurotoxicity following preor perinatal exposure to these compounds. Thus, the tipping point concentrations provide a sensitive indicator of biological alterations in developing neural networks that may be relevant to adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes following in vivo exposures to chemicals.

The need to develop a screening battery of tests to assess the potential for a compound to cause developmental neurotoxicity is now well recognized (Bal-Price et al., 2010, 2015; Fritsche et al., 2017). Several in vitro assays have now been developed for a number of process critical to nervous system development, including proliferation (Breier et al., 2008), neurite outgrowth and synaptogenesis (Harrill et al., 2010, 2011: Stiegler et al., 2011), migration (Zimmer et al., 2014; Ny /uniFB00 eler et al., 2017), and apoptosis (Druwe et al., 2015). Assessment of function following exposure during in vitro development of neural networks using MEAs (Hogberg et al., 2011; Robinette et al., 2011; Brown et al., 2016; Dingemans et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017) is unique among these assays in that it can provide both functional and temporal measurements from the same network. This facilitates the determination of whether the system recovers or deviates from homeostasis over the

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5. Comparison of tipping points to cytotoxicity and individual network parameters. Tipping points could be determined for 42 compounds, and are compared to A) concentrations that impact cell viability (orange triangles, lower EC50 between total LDH and alamar blue assays) and B) the minimum (purple circles) and median (blue diamonds) EC50 value for individual network parameters based on Area Under the Curve (AUC) calculations. Heatmap on right in panel B shows AUC EC50 values for each network parameter included in tipping point determination for reference. (For interpretation of the references to color in this /uniFB01 gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

measured time span, and thus the resultant data are well-suited for determination of tipping points.

Neural network activity as measured by MEAs can be described by multiple parameters that include measurements of the overall activity ( e.g. mean /uniFB01 ring rate, number of active electrodes), bursting ( e.g. burst duration, burst rate) and coordinated activity ( e.g. correlation coe /uniFB03 -cient, mutual information), most of which show clear ' developmental ' changes with time in vitro (Cotterill et al., 2016). In the present study, tipping points were determined based on chemical e /uniFB00 ects on 9 of these parameters because they can be derived directly from the spike train. Although other parameters also can be assessed, preliminary analysis using additional parameters indicated that this would have increased the uncertainty in the tipping point analysis. In addition, the parameters selected were among those identi /uniFB01 ed as being more impactful in separating treatments that alter network function from those that do not using Random Forest analyses (Brown et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017). Thus, the tipping points calculated here represent a composite value for e /uniFB00 ects on the 9 parameters included. Tipping points could be determined for 42 of the 64 compounds that perturbed activity of neural networks following exposure during network development (Frank et al., 2017). In all but 2 of these cases (mevastatin and emamectin), the calculated tipping point is more potent than the corresponding EC50 value for cytotoxicity, indicating that these changes re/uniFB02 ect alterations in network function rather than simply decrements in cellular viability. Further, for 23 of the 42 compounds, the tipping point was lower than the EC50 for the most sensitive of these parameters; while only 4 of the 42 compounds had tipping points that were higher than the median EC50 of individual parameters of network function.

Thus, even though they are based on an ' averaged ' response, these data indicate that the tipping point calculations are sensitive measures of when and at what concentrations network formation begins to be irrevocably altered by chemical exposure.

In Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century: Strategy and Vision, the use of cell-based toxicity testing methods was encouraged (NRC, 2007). Important to this concept was the ability to determine di /uniFB00 erences in adaptive responses (homeostatic responses) versus those responses that led toward a ' toxicity pathway ' . Tipping points are one method for determining the adaptive vs adverse responses, and in the present case, the tipping points represent the concentration at which development of network function no longer proceeds according to its normal trajectory in vitro . Although speculative, an additional point to consider in the present study is whether or not the ' adaptive ' responses just below the tipping points (concentrations at which ' recovery ' is observed), might also ultimately lead to adverse responses. The importance of electrical activity in development of the nervous system is well established (Kerschensteiner, 2014; Babij and De Marco Garcia, 2016). Further, the timing of electrical activity during nervous system development is also crucial, and delays in electrical activity have been associated with neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention-de /uniFB01 cit hyper activity syndrome (McLaughlin et al., 2010). Thus, the possibility exists that even in cases where some recovery of network activity to normal response levels occurs, the excursion out of normal parameters may disrupt the timing of other important event sequences, resulting in latent or delayed e /uniFB00 ects on nervous system function. Such e /uniFB00 ects may only become apparent later in life or only when the nervous system is challenged in a way that uncovers the de /uniFB01 cit. Of note, the present

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Comparison between predicted plasma levels for critical concentrations and in vivo estimates from the httk model. For those chemicals with 1) in vitro predicted critical concentrations, 2) in vivo studies indicating neurological e /uniFB00 ect, and 3) available toxicokinetic data the time-integrated plasma concentration (area under the curve or AUC) was predicted for the LOEL associated with each chemical-speci /uniFB01 c study. The chemical-speci /uniFB01 c prediction is indicated by the /uniFB01 rst four letters of each chemicals name. There were two available studies for each chemical. The identity ( ' perfect predictor ' ) line is indicated by a solid black line, while the dashed lines indicate ten-fold above and below perfect prediction. Because all in vitro treatments were exposed for the same amount of time, the relationship between nominal in vitro concentration and time-integrated concentration is a constant.

experiments stopped on DIV 12, and that network function was not assessed or challenged after this time. As such, it remains to be determined whether or not adaptive responses in the present study represent true recovery, or a change in state that might lead to adverse responses at a later time.

In vitro data will be useful for decision-making beyond screening and prioritization if there is con /uniFB01 dence that the concentrations at which e /uniFB00 ects are observed in vitro have relevance to blood levels that cause neurodevelopmental e /uniFB00 ects in vivo . In order to examine how the tipping points determined herein compare to dose levels associated with neurodevelopmental toxicity, compounds from Table 1 in Mundy et al. (2015) were selected as representative in vivo exposures that were associated with a DNT outcome. High-throughput toxicokinetics were then used to estimate relevant blood levels for the 6 compounds for which su /uniFB03 cient data existed. When compared to the tipping point concentrations, in 5 of 6 cases, the tipping points for e /uniFB00 ects on neural network function were equal to or lower than doses associated with DNT outcomes. Interestingly, diethylstilbestrol, the one compound where the tipping point did not match the levels associated with DNT outcomes in vivo , is a well-known estrogenic compound. Although acute activity in mature networks does show some responsiveness to estrogenic compounds (Strickland et al., 2017), there is no information on whether those e /uniFB00 ects are mediated by the estrogen receptor or regarding the role of estrogen in maturation of neural networks in vitro . Thus, it could be that the in vivo e /uniFB00 ects of diethylstilbestrol are mediated via mechanisms not present in the in vitro assay.

Comparisons to chemical concentrations known or predicted to cause developmental neurotoxicity in vivo for all of the compounds tested herein would have been desirable. However, important data were not available for all of the test compounds. Never the less, based on this small sample, calculated tipping points indicate e /uniFB00 ects at relevant doses in vivo . Several caveats should be noted regarding this analysis. First, the in vivo dose levels were simply those reported in the literature as cited in Mundy et al., 2015; these were not LOAEL values from guideline studies. Thus, it may be that other events or endpoints are more sensitive to perturbation than those examined here, either in vivo or in vitro . Second, the httk model predictions in some cases (for example the mouse data) relied on substitution of data from another species (human), as species-speci /uniFB01 c data were not available, or on other assumptions, for example, regarding chemical binding to protein. Third, it should be noted that a relationship between the in vitro alternations of network development and the in vivo endpoint reported in the studies used is not implied by these comparisons, simply that dose/ concentration levels are concordant. In the future, such associations could be strengthened by linking the in vitro e /uniFB00 ects, through a series of key events, to an adverse neurodevelopmental outcome ( e.g. through an adverse outcome pathway or AOP). There is a critical need for the development of adverse outcome pathways relevant to developmental neurotoxicity (Bal-Price and Meek, 2017); only a few (~8) AOPs relevant to DNT have been established in the AOPwiki database (https:// aopwiki.org/).

In summary, the present data demonstrate that toxicological tipping points can be determined for chemical e /uniFB00 ects on neural network development, and, based on a small set of compounds, that those tipping point values are relevant to in vivo dose levels associated with adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes. As such, this combination of approaches could o /uniFB00 ers high potential as a powerful tool for assessment of potential developmental neurotoxicity for larger numbers of chemicals.

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2018.01.017.

## Con /uniFB02 ict of interest statement

The authors declare no con /uniFB02 ict of interest pertaining to this manuscript. Preparation of this document has been funded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. This document has been subject to review by the National Health and Environmental E /uniFB00 ects Research Laboratory (NHEERL) and approved for publication. Approval does not signify that the contents re /uniFB02 ect the views of the Agency, nor does mention of trade names or commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Dr. William Boyes, US EPA and Dr. Nisha Sipes, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, for their useful comments on a draft version of this manuscript.

## References

- Adams, P.M., 1982. E /uniFB00 ects of perinatal chlordiazepoxide exposure on rat preweaning and postweaning behavior. Neurobehav. Toxicol. Teratol. 4, 279 -282.
- Babij, R., De Marco Garcia, N., 2016. Neuronal activity controls the development of interneurons in the somatosensory cortex. Front. Biol. (Beijing) 11, 459 -470.
- Ball, K.R., Grant, C., Mundy, W.R., Shafer, T.J., 2017. A multivariate extension of mutual information for growing neural networks. Neural Netw. 95, 29 -43.
- Bal-Price, A., Meek, M.E.B., 2017. Adverse outcome pathways: application to enhance mechanistic understanding of neurotoxicity. Pharmacol. Ther. 179, 84 -95.
- Bal-Price, A.K., Hogberg, H.T., Buzanska, L., Lenas, P., van Vliet, E., Hartung, T., 2010. In vitro developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) testing: relevant models and endpoints. Neurotoxicology 31, 545 -554.
- Bal-Price, A., Crofton, K.M., Leist, M., Allen, S., Arand, M., Buetler, T., Delrue, N., FitzGerald, R.E., Hartung, T., Heinonen, T., et al., 2015. International STakeholder NETwork (ISTNET): creating a developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) testing road map for regulatory purposes. Arch. Toxicol. 89, 269 -287.
- Brannen, K.C., Devaud, L.L., Liu, J., Lauder, J.M., 1998. Prenatal exposure to neurotoxicants dieldrin or lindane alters tert-butylbicyclophosphorothionate binding to GABA(a) receptors in fetal rat brainstem. Dev. Neurosci. 20, 34 -41.
- Breier, J.M., Radio, N.M., Mundy, W.R., Shafer, T.J., 2008. Development of a highthroughput screening assay for chemical e /uniFB00 ects on proliferation and viability of immortalized human neural progenitor cells. Toxicol. Sci. 105, 119 -133.
- Brown, J.P., Hall, D., Frank, C.L., Wallace, K., Mundy, W.R., Shafer, T.J., 2016. Editor's highlight: evaluation of a microelectrode array-based assay for neural network ontogeny using training set chemicals. Toxicol. Sci. 154, 126 -139.
- Buschman, T.J., Kastner, S., 2015. From behavior to neural dynamics: an integrated theory of attention. Neuron 88, 127 -144.
- Chiappalone, M., Vato, A., Tedesco, M.B., Marcoli, M., Davide, F., Martinoia, S., 2003. Networks of neurons coupled to microelectrode arrays: a neuronal sensory system for pharmacological applications. Biosens. Bioelectron. 18, 627 -634.
- Clark, C.V.H., Gorman, D., Vernadakis, A., 1970. E /uniFB00 ects of prenatal administration of psychotropic drugs on behavior of developing rats. Dev. Psychobiol. 3, 225 -235.
- Core Team, R., 2016. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria URL. https://www.R-project. org/.
- Cotterill, E., Hall, D., Wallace, K., Mundy, W.R., Eglen, S.J., Shafer, T.J., 2016. Characterization of early cortical neural network development in multiwell microelectrode array plates. J. Biomol. Screen. 21, 510 -519.
- Dam, K., Seidler, F.J., Slotkin, T.A., 2000. Chlorpyrifos exposure during a critical neonatal period elicits gender-selective de /uniFB01 cits in the development of coordination skills and locomotor activity. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 121, 179 -187.
- Dingemans, M.M.L., Schütte, M.G., Wiersma, D.M.M., de Groot, A., van Kleef, R.G.D.M., Wijnolts, F.M.J., Westerink, R.H.S., 2016. Chronic 14-day exposure to insecticides or methylmercury modulates neuronal activity in primary rat cortical cultures. Neurotoxicology 57, 194 -202.
- Druwe, I., Freudenrich, T.M., Wallace, K., Shafer, T.J., Mundy, W.R., 2015. Sensitivity of neuroprogenitor cells to chemical-induced apoptosis using a multiplexed assay suitable for high-throughput screening. Toxicology 333, 14 -24.
- Frank, C.L., Brown, J.P., Wallace, K., Mundy, W.R., Shafer, T.J., 2017. Developmental neurotoxicants disrupt activity in cortical networks on microelectrode arrays: results of screening 86 compounds during neural network formation. Toxicol. Sci. 160, 121 -135.
- Frieder, B., Epstein, S., Grimm, V.E., 1984. The e /uniFB00 ects of exposure to diazepam during various stages of gestation or during lactation on the development and behavior of rat pups. Psychopharmacology 83, 51 -55.
- Fritsche, E., Crofton, K.M., Hernandez, A.F., Hougaard Bennekou, S., Leist, M., Bal-Price, A., Reaves, E., Wilks, M.F., Terron, A., Solecki, R., et al., 2017. OECD/EFSA workshop on developmental neurotoxicity (DNT): the use of non-animal test methods for regulatory purposes. ALTEX 34, 311 -315.
- Grandjean, P., Landrigan, P.J., 2006. Developmental neurotoxicity of industrial chemicals. Lancet 368, 2167 -2178.
- Grandjean, P., Landrigan, P.J., 2014. Neurobehavioural e /uniFB00 ects of developmental toxicity. Lancet Neurol. 13, 330 -338.
- Hannah, R.S., Roth, S.H., Spira, A.W., 1982. The e /uniFB00 ects of chlorpromazine and phenobarbital on cerebellar Purkinje cells. Teratology 26, 21 -25.
- Harrill, J.A., Freudenrich, T.M., Machacek, D.W., Stice, S.L., Mundy, W.R., 2010. Quantitative assessment of neurite outgrowth in human embryonic stem cell-derived hN2 cells using automated high-content image analysis. Neurotoxicology 31,

277 -290.

- Harrill, J.A., Robinette, B.L., Mundy, W.R., 2011. Use of high content image analysis to detect chemical-induced changes in synaptogenesis in vitro. Toxicol. in Vitro 25, 368 -387.
- Hogberg, H.T., Sobanski, T., Novellino, A., Whelan, M., Weiss, D.G., Bal-Price, A.K., 2011. Application of micro-electrode arrays (MEAs) as an emerging technology for developmental neurotoxicity: evaluation of domoic acid-induced e /uniFB00 ects in primary cultures of rat cortical neurons. Neurotoxicology 32, 158 -168.
- Kaitsuka, T., Fukunaga, K., Soeda, F., Shirasaki, T., Miyamoto, E., Takahama, K., 2007. Changes in Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II activity and its relation to performance in passive avoidance response and long-term potentiation formation in mice prenatally exposed to diethylstilbestrol. Neuroscience 144, 1415 -1424.
- Keller, D.A., Juberg, D.R., Catlin, N., Farland, W.H., Hess, F.G., Wolf, D.C., Doerrer, N.G., 2012. Identi /uniFB01 cation and characterization of adverse e /uniFB00 ects in 21st century toxicology. Toxicol. Sci. 126, 291 -297.
- Kerschensteiner, D., 2014. Spontaneous network activity and synaptic development. Neuroscientist 20, 272 -290.
- Korte, M., Schmitz, D., 2016. Cellular and system biology of memory: timing, molecules, and beyond. Physiol. Rev. 96, 647 -693.
- Krug, A.K., Kolde, R., Gaspar, J.A., Rempel, E., Balmer, N.V., Meganathan, K., Vojnits, K., Baquié, M., Waldmann, T., Ensenat-Waser, R., et al., 2013. Human embryonic stem cell-derived test systems for developmental neurotoxicity: a transcriptomics approach. Arch. Toxicol. 87, 123 -143.
- Kurishingal, H., Palanza, P., Brain, P.F., 1992. E /uniFB00 ects of exposure of pregnant mice to chlordiazepoxide (CDP) on the development and ultrasound production of their o /uniFB00 spring. Gen. Pharmacol. 23, 49 -53.
- McLaughlin, K.A., Fox, N.A., Zeanah, C.H., Sheridan, M.A., Marshall, P., Nelson, C.A., 2010. Delayed maturation in brain electrical activity partially explains the association between early environmental deprivation and symptoms of attention-de /uniFB01 cit/ hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 68, 329 -336.
- Mihalick, S.M., 2003. Perinatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol improves olfactory discrimination learning in male and female Swiss -Webster mice. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 80, 55 -62.
- Mundy, W.R., Padilla, S., Breier, J.M., Crofton, K.M., Gilbert, M.E., Herr, D.W., Jensen, K.F., Radio, N.M., Ra /uniFB00 aele, K.C., Schumacher, K., et al., 2015. Expanding the test set: chemicals with potential to disrupt mammalian brain development. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 52, 25 -35.
- Nicosia, A., Giardina, L., Di Leo, F., Medico, M., Mazzola, C., Genazzani, A.A., et al., 2003. Long-lasting behavioral changes induced by pre- or neonatal exposure to diazepam in rats. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 469, 103 -109.
- NRC, 2007. Toxicity Testing in the Twenty-First Century: A Vision and a Strategy. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.
- Ny /uniFB00 eler, J., Dolde, X., Krebs, A., Pinto-Gil, K., Pastor, M., Behl, M., Waldmann, T., Leist, M., 2017. Combination of multiple neural crest migration assays to identify environmental toxicants from a proof-of-concept chemical library. Arch. Toxicol. 91, 3613 -3632.
- OECD, 2007. Test guideline 426. In: OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals. Developmental Neurotoxicity Study. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
- Development, Paris Available: http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/test-no426-developmental-neurotoxicity-study\_9789264067394-en (Accessed 10/28/2015).
- Olson, K.L., Boush, G.M., Matsumura, F., 1980. Pre- and postnatal exposure to dieldrin: persistent stimulatory and behavioral e /uniFB00 ects. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 13, 20 -33.
- Pearce, R.G., Setzer, R.W., Davis, J.L., Wambaugh, J.F., 2017. Evaluation and calibration of high-throughput predictions of chemical distribution to tissues. J. Pharmacokinet. Pharmacodyn. 44, 549 -565.
- Radio, N.M., Mundy, W.R., 2008. Developmental neurotoxicity testing in vitro: models for assessing chemical e /uniFB00 ects on neurite outgrowth. Neurotoxicology 29, 549 -565.
- Ricceri, L., Venerosi, A., Capone, F., Cometa, M.F., Lorenzini, P., Fortuna, S., et al., 2006. Developmental neurotoxicity of organophosphorous pesticides: fetal and neonatal exposure to chlorpyrifos alters sex-speci /uniFB01 c behaviors at adulthood in mice. Toxicol. Sci. 93, 105 -113.
- Robinette, B.L., Harrill, J.A., Mundy, W.R., Shafer, T.J., 2011. In vitro assessment of developmental neurotoxicity: use of microelectrode arrays to measure functional changes in neuronal network ontogeny. Front. Neuroeng. 4, 1.
- Salinas, E., Sejnowski, T.J., 2001. Correlated neuronal activity and the /uniFB02 ow of neural information. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 539 -550.
- Schmuck, M.R., Temme, T., Dach, K., de Boer, D., Barenys, M., Bendt, F., Mosig, A., Fritsche, E., 2017. Omnisphero: a high-content image analysis (HCA) approach for phenotypic developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) screenings of organoid neurosphere cultures in vitro. Arch. Toxicol. 91, 2017 -2028.
- Shah, I., Setzer, R.W., Jack, J., Houck, K.A., Judson, R.S., Knudsen, T.B., Liu, J., Martin, M.T., Reif, D.M., Richard, A.M., et al., 2016. Using ToxCast ™ data to reconstruct dynamic cell state trajectories and estimate toxicological points of departure. Environ. Health Perspect. 124, 910 -919.
- Smirnova, L., Hogberg, H.T., Leist, M., Hartung, T., 2014. Developmental neurotoxicity challenges in the 21st century and in vitro opportunities. ALTEX 31, 129 -156.
- Stiegler, N.V., Krug, A.K., Matt, F., Leist, M., 2011. Assessment of chemical-induced impairment of human neurite outgrowth by multiparametric live cell imaging in highdensity cultures. Toxicol. Sci. 121, 73 -87.
- Strickland, J.D., Martin, M., Houck, T., Richard, A., Shafer, T.J., 2017. Screening the ToxCast phase II libraries for neuroactivity using cortical neurons grown on multiwell microelectrode array (mwMEA) plates. Arch. Toxicol. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1007/s00204-017-2035-5. (Available online Aug 2, 2017).
- US EPA. (US Environmental Protection Agency), 1998. Health e /uniFB00 ects guidelines OPPTS 870.6300. In: Developmental Neurotoxicity Study. EPA 712-C-98-239.
- Van Pelt, J., Corner, M.A., Wolters, P.S., Rutten, W.L.C., Ramakers, G.J.A., 2004. Longterm stability and developmental changes in spontaneous network burst /uniFB01 ring patterns in dissociated rat cerebral cortex cell cultures on multielectrode arrays. Neurosci. Lett. 361, 86 -89.
- Wagenaar, D.A., Pine, J., Potter, S.M., 2006. An extremely rich repertoire of bursting patterns during the development of cortical cultures. BMC Neurosci. 7, 11.
- Zimmer, B., Pallocca, G., Dreser, N., Foerster, S., Waldmann, T., Westerhout, J., Julien, S., Krause, K.H., van Thriel, C., Hengstler, J.G., et al., 2014. Pro /uniFB01 ling of drugs and environmental chemicals for functional impairment of neural crest migration in a novel stem cell-based test battery. Arch. Toxicol. 88, 1109 -1126.